PAGE 1
A Design Perspective on Data 
Melanie Feinberg 
School of Library and Information Science (SILS) 
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
mfeinber@unc.edu 
ABSTRACT 
Empirical studies invariably show that data generation is 
situationally contingent and interpretively flexible , even 
when data is collected automatically. This essay situates 
data generation within a design perspective, demonstrating 
how data creation can be understood as a multilayered set 
of interlocking design activities. By showing how data is 
infused with design, this paper argues that any “use” of data 
represents a continuation of its design. We are always 
designers of data, never its mere appropriators.  
Author Keywords 
Data; design; infrastructure;  metadata; materiality 
ACM Classification Keywords  
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presenta tion (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous 
INTRODUCTION 
It is well understood  that data  involves more than  mere 
recording of facts.  Researchers across disciplines have 
described the mixture of human motivations, historical 
traditions, environmental and technological affordances, 
and particular goals in which data  is conceptualized, 
structured, captured, aggregated, and analyzed  [see, for 
example, 3, 1 2, 1 7, 18, 2 5]. In HCI, user studies describe 
the richly situated environments in which data is constituted  
[as in 2, 16, 21, 26]. Most recently, studies of personal 
informatics detail how data collected by automated 
mechanisms (as with fitness trackers or household sensors) 
is dependent on context for its meaning , in accordance with 
user behavior that might be systematic and consistent, or 
that might equally be fluid and improvisational —or 
sometimes both  [for example, see 5, 6, 8, 23, 2 7]. For 
instance, a step counter on a  smartphone might be  
implemented by one person as a meticulous , comprehensive 
log, while another person uses it an opportunistic and 
haphazard recording of partial activity. A lthough the 
counter is just recording steps , its deployment is situational, 
creative, and flexible. Design of data doesn’t stop with the 
design of a step -counting feature; it proceeds through the 
data collection patterns of smartphone users, and it 
continues as counts are generated and aggregated over time.  
What does it mean, then, to “use” step count data as an 
element of some subsequent design, perhaps to visualize 
activity patterns in a neighborhood or to suggest health 
improvement goals?  In this paper, I illustrate how all “use” 
of data involves its design : how data is never merely the 
input to design, but always its object . I show how data 
creation can be understood as a multilayered set of 
interlocking design activities, and how data use is the 
continuation of these ac tivities.  
While “data” may appear conceptually simple —a data point 
is just a value, often a number, like the number of steps 
taken each day —any data requires some kind of conceptual 
infrastructure to have meaning. The number of steps 
involves the designation of a form of measurement (steps) 
and a scale of measurement (positive integers of whole 
steps). Data also involves collection processes  that 
individually implement the conceptual infrastructure (how 
each step is counted) and aggregation processes that 
integrate many acts of independent collection (the 
association of each step with a particular device across 
established time units). To make my argument, I trace the 
role of design in these areas: infrastru cture development, 
collection, and aggregation. I demonstrate how design 
figures into these activities  using a variety of examples. 
(Although some examples are drawn from a research study, 
this paper is not a report of findings. It’s an essay in which 
research findings are deployed as one form of evidence. ) To 
provide context for my discussio n, the next section briefly 
reviews accounts of data collection as an interpretively 
flexible, locally contingent performance, as presented in 
HCI and aligned fields.  
RELATED WORK 
Data collection has become a pervasive, everyday activity . 
Applications routinely collect data to  algorithmically shape 
interaction experience , and individuals increasingly elect to 
collect data on themselves to inform their own behavior.  
Accordingly, descriptive accounts of data creation and use 
have proliferated in the CHI community. Many studies 
focus on personal tracking data, and the moniker “human -
data interaction” has been proposed to understand how 
people interact with their persona l data [5]. When 
researchers look at practices of personal data collection and 
use, they observe a diverse set of creative, flexible 
approaches to data creation, tightly integrated  within a local 
context [6, 8 , 2 7]. Rooksby  and colleagues, for example,  
describe how people employ fitness tracking devices to 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full cit ation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permiss ion 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2017, May 06-11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 
© 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4655-9/17/05…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025837  
Data as Design Material
CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA
2952

PAGE 2
collect data in highly individual ways, even though the 
actual data is collected automatically by sensors. Someone 
might choose to wear a fitness tracker only for certain 
activities or at all times, in ef fect creating different  kinds of 
datasets to align with their own, dynamic needs, 
preferences, and understanding  [23]. Similarly, Tolmie  and 
colleagues describe the deployment of household sensors  in 
three households and the variations in behavior that giv e 
rise to variations in data  [27]. Leaving the garage door 
open, which makes the kitchen temperature drop: this is a 
data creation event, just like deciding when to wear a 
fitness tracker. Others have made similar observations in 
the context o f government data [2, 21]. McMillan and 
colleagues, for example, interview stakeholders in northern 
European cities to understand how “the production and use 
of data is shaped by local contingencies of influence, 
power, money, and bureaucracy ” [21]. 
The creative, situated, and interpretive nature of data 
collection is well established across disciplines. Goodwin 
describes how archeologists apply  the Munsell color chart 
to earth samples [12]. Latour recounts how botanists distill 
the forest into a cabinet  of specimens  [18]. Bowker reveal s 
differences in collection and testing of lake water samples 
over time [3]. Star and Griesemer note competing concerns 
of trappers and naturalists collecting biodiversity specimens 
in the Sierra Nevada  [25]. All these studies and many oth ers 
demonstrate how the practice of data collection —even in 
science—is informed by disciplinary convention, situational 
contingencies, and individual flair.  Notably, interpretive 
flexibility in data creation occurs despite the use of 
standardized schemas, vocabularies, and protocols to 
enforce consistent, semantically interoperable data. With a 
professional tradition dating from the nineteenth century, 
libraries have developed an incredible array of guidelines, 
processes, and roles devoted to reliable data collection. 
Nonetheless, Carlyle notes how complex, dynamic  realities 
constantly challenge catalogers to interpret rules anew —
even for matters that seem banal and straightforward, like 
determining the author of a book  [4]. Kansa, Kansa, and 
Arbuckle descri be how zooarcheologists working in the 
same region in Turkey, using the same system to describe 
tooth wear on fossils, nonetheless structured tooth data so 
differently that skilled human editors could not easily 
aggregate it  [17]. Jackson and Barbrow discu ss the 
insufficiency of an extremely detailed collection protocol 
for a single ecology lab to enable frictionless data collection 
[16]. From a “big rock in the middle of the stream” to bears 
“disrupting the collection equipment” the world presents an 
unruly environment that cannot be circumscribed by 
standards but must be interpreted in light of them. Across 
such accounts, the same conclus ion arises: although data 
collection might be mundane and tedious, it is also 
dynamic, creative, and unpredictably diverse , even when 
data is collected without apparent human intervention.  
Given th is interdisciplinary consensus, it is significant that 
work practice often contradicts it. For example, standard 
practices of information professionals (people who 
generate, curate, and aggregate data as a primary job 
responsibility, including librarians, archivists, and data 
managers) continue to approach interp retive flexibility in 
data creation as a problem  to be solved. As noted in the 
preceding paragraph,  scholars of information studies  have 
long acknowledged the role of interpretive judgment in data 
creation. For example, i n 1968, Wilson argued that a 
document’s subject (its aboutness) could not be 
conclusively determined [30]. As Furner has observed, 
there is no scholarly opposition to Wilson’s argument  [9]. 
Nonetheless, professional practice continues to operate as if 
documents “have” subjects that can be accurately and 
consistently identified. What causes this conceptual 
dissonance? Professional goals and values align poorly with 
empirical realities of data variability and interpretive 
flexibility. In information professions , data utility is seen as 
dependent upon  globally consistent meaning [13, 1 5, 32]. 
Accordingly, like Sisyphyus eternally pushing that rock up 
the hill, data professionals strive to approximate 
universality and objectivity in data collection, even if such 
goals can never be  achieved. In t his view, if creative 
interpretation can’t be eliminated in data collection, practice 
rules and guidelines  might at least minimize it.   
This inconsistency—where one knows conceptually that 
data is interpretively fluid and yet acts as if it were, might 
be, or should be objective and universal —is not limited to 
information professionals. In the studies of archeologists, 
botanists, ecologists, and so on cited earlier in this section, 
scientists, also, cling to an ideal of globally reliable, 
semantically interoperable data collection.  Why? Their 
professional goals and values, also, align poorly with 
empirical realities of interpretive flexibility in data creation. 
Just like information professionals, scientists att empt to 
account for and ameliorate situational conditions that 
complicate data interoperability. They make these efforts so 
that, after data is collected, they can aggregate and “use”  (or 
reuse) it, without considering how the character of the data 
might continue to evolve through its aggregation and use. 
This conceptual dissonance  can also surface  
in HCI. 
Descriptive studies of data creation in HCI empha size its 
creative situatedness, and design research has embraced 
interpretively flexible  design outcomes  [see, for example, 
10, 24 , 29]. But design projects in HCI can omit the work 
performed on data, making it seem as if  data were a stable 
material to be “used .” For example, Gaver and colleagues  
built beautiful, custom “datacatcher” devices to convey 
socioeconomic data about a user’s  location [11]. Their 
paper focuses on  the effort to design and build the 
datacatchers, to distribute them, and to document their use . 
The team’s activities with the data conveyed through the 
device are minimally documented. The project’s data work 
is briefly described as pulling from “hundreds of data sets 
from 14 online sources,”  with “templates to transform 
numerical or category data into sentences.” Torres, 
O’Leary, and Paulos created evocative art objects to display 
Data as Design Material
CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA
2953

PAGE 3
data sources, such as a set of fans whose speeds varied 
depending on Twitter mentions of candidates for president 
of the United States. Their paper also uses a minimal 
approach to describe their  work with data. For example, the  
paper does not elaborate upon  the design choice to employ  
“mentions” as the data element (and not, say, the content of 
the mention or the sentiment of the mention)  [28]. Worthy, 
Matthews, and Viller deployed a technology probe to spark 
reflections on  data gathering and the Internet of Thi ngs 
[31]. The probe collected sensor data from participant 
households, but the paper focuses on the general idea of 
data collection rather than what was actually collected.  
In the following sections of this paper, I argue for a view of 
data as a multilayered design artifact , which implies  that we 
can never incorporate data into a product without 
redesigning the data itself. To understand data from this 
perspective, I draw on ideas of thing-design, use- design, 
and design after design from Johan Redström [22]. Thing-
design focuses design on an object: a chair. Use -design 
focuses design on an activity: sitting. Design after design 
involves the “user” of an artifact adapting it to a new 
purpose. By installing, configuring, and adapting software, 
the “user” of a computer is also a “designer” of her personal 
experience with it. Redström describes design after design 
as a series of processes in which the product of one design 
activity becomes the material for subsequent design 
activities: a textile is d esigned and then used as material for 
a dress, for instance [22]. The A. Telier group draws on 
these ideas to propose the idea of infrastructuring a goal of 
participatory design. Infrastructuring involves creating 
conditions under which dialogues to imagin e new design 
possibilities are facilitated [1]. The A. Telier group focuses 
on infrastructuring as enabling dialogue between people, 
drawing on an older sense of the word thing as a meeting 
place to resolve disputes. But such conversations can occur 
between people and design materials as well.  I use these 
concepts to present data as a dynamic cascade of design 
decisions, with each “product” serving as “material” for the 
next move in an ongoing design chain.  
THE ROLE OF DESIGN I N DATA INFRASTRUCTURE  
All dat a relies on decisions regarding what to record, how 
those values should be collected, and the form in which 
those values should be expressed. These decisions 
constitute the infrastructure under which data is initially 
created, subsequently aggregated, and ultimately used. For 
instance, weather is typically represented with temperature 
data. We all know that temperature is measured with a 
certain scale (usually Fahrenheit or Celsius). But the 
collection of temperature data relies on other decisions as 
well: the device used for measurement (such as a 
thermometer), the placement of that device (on the ground, 
in the air, in the sun, in the shade), the times at which 
measurements are taken. Moreover, the selection of 
temperature as a useful property to understand weather is 
itself part of the data infrastructure.  
In the vocabulary of relational databases, data infrastructure 
involves the selection and definition of entities, attributes, 
and value parameters, plus the processes established to 
facilitate data crea tion. For the example of temperature, the 
entity might be weather, with an attribute of temperature, as 
expressed in degrees Celsius. Although a typical entity -
relationship diagram wouldn’t specify data collection 
procedures, such processes are often defin ed and 
documented as part of data generation protocols. For 
example, the protocol for ecological field data described by 
Jackson and Barbrow details not just what kinds of data to 
collect and the form in which observations should be 
collected but the proce sses for doing so [16].  
Many elements of data infrastructure  might also be 
described as “metadata.” I’ve chosen not to use “metadata” 
because that term can be employed to indicate a wide range 
of data-related notions that are both more and less than the 
idea of data infrastructure defined here . One might refer to 
the date that a photo is taken as metadata in both a general 
sense (the date of capture as a kind of data to describe 
photos, just as the temperature is a kind of data to describe 
weather) and in a specific one (the actual date and tim e at 
which a specific photo is taken). “Date taken” is metadata 
about photos in general, and “July 10, 2016” is metadata 
about a specific photo. In the context of data infrastructure, 
I mean the general sense and not the specific one.  
In HCI, the developm ent of data infrastructure is not 
commonly considered as a design activity, perhaps because 
such decisions often seem banal and obvious, or because 
they seem more associated with subject -matter expertise 
and scientific methods than with a design perspectiv e. The 
use of temperature to understand weather, and the means in 
which temperature is measured, seem a matter for 
meteorologists to specify, not for designers to interrogate or 
imagine differently. I’ll use a set of examples of data 
infrastructure from a specific context —online dating 
services—to show how design is relevant to these kinds of 
decisions, no matter how mundane or scientific they appear.  
Many online dating services support the creation of user 
profiles to facilitate both retrieval (finding a set of potential 
dates) and selection (determining the best option in the set 
of matches). Users are asked to describe themselves along a 
wide variety of attributes, many of which are similar across 
services. Two of these common attributes are body type an d 
ethnicity, physical characteristics that might —naively—
seem simple and straightforward, not a matter for design. 
These attributes are typically expressed via a set of 
controlled values, which vary across dating sites . Tables 1 
and 2 show controlled values available for daters to 
describe themselves according to these attributes in five 
dating services. I’ve used these online dating examples 
many times to explore the space of data infrastructure in the 
classroom. Students’ responses are always the same. When  
Data as Design Material
CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA
2954

PAGE 4
Match OK Cupid Black Planet Love JDate Gluten-Free Singles 
No answer 
Slender 
Athletic and 
toned 
A few extra 
pounds 
About average 
Heavyset 
Stocky 
 
Rather not say 
Thin 
Overweight 
Average build 
Fit 
Jacked 
A little extra 
Full figured 
Curvy 
Used up 
Athletic/muscular 
Disabled 
Large frame 
Medium 
Toned 
Lean/slender 
Average/medium build|  
Athletic/fit 
A few extra pounds  
Large/broad build 
Cuddly 
Firm and toned 
Husky 
Petite 
Portly 
Proportional 
Ripped 
Rubenesque 
Small frame 
Soft 
Stocky 
Voluptuous 
Zaftig 
Muscular 
Modelesque 
Slim 
About average 
Athletic 
Pumped up 
Have some extra 
pounds 
Big and lovely 
Table 1. Body Type options in five online dating sites, as collected in July, 2016. Match and OK Cupid are large sites that serve a 
general population, while Black Planet Love, JDate, and Gluten -Free Singles target particular characteristics of race (Black 
people), religion (Jewish people), or lifestyle (people who follow a gluten -free diet). 
Match OK Cupid Black Planet Love JDate Gluten-Free Singles 
Asian 
Black/African 
descent 
East Indian 
Latino/Hispanic 
Middle Eastern 
Native American 
Pacific Islander 
White/Caucasian 
Other 
Asian 
Middle Eastern 
Black 
Native 
American 
Hispanic/Latin 
Pacific Islander 
Indian 
White  
Other 
Asian/Pacific Islander 
Black/African 
American 
Hispanic/Latino 
White 
Other 
Note: A 
separate 
item for 
Additional 
Ancestry 
lists about 
15 cultural 
groups, 
primarily 
of African, 
Caribbean, 
and Latin 
American 
origins. 
none African 
African/American 
Asian 
White/Caucasian 
East Indian 
Hispanic 
Indian 
Latino 
Mediterranean 
Middle Eastern 
Mixed 
Table 2. Ethnicity options in the five online dating sites, as collected in July, 2016 (Black Planet Love labels this as Race, not 
Ethnicity). These are implemented as checkboxes except for Gluten -Free Singles, which uses a menu.  
I ask them to think about characteristics like body type and 
ethnicity in a general sense, these properties seem like 
relatively stable concepts that can be defined in a general, 
neutral, and objective way. The project of creating data 
infrastructure for these characteristics, such as lists of 
controlled values, seems like a scientific kind of project, not 
a design one, and it doesn’t seem problematic to think about 
creating a universal set of such values that would work 
across, say, all online dating services. Then I distribute the 
controlled vocabularies that are actually used to describe 
body types in these da ting services (see Table 1). After 
students stop laughing at values like Big and Lovely, 
Jacked, and Cuddly, I ask if the variation between dating 
services is problematic. Shouldn’t there be a single 
authoritative means of capturing this information for al l 
situations? After seeing these real implementations, 
students always respond that the variation is not 
problematic at all: this diversity  represents different 
understandings of body types for the different communities  
represented by the different dating services. Moreover, the 
idea of body type itself is revealed, as implemented in 
dating sites, to be different than the students might have 
initially conceived. Body type is not neutral, objective, and 
general but personal, performative, and situational: it  has to 
do with how you feel about your body and how you want 
others to perceive your attitude toward your physique, 
rather than your actual proportions. It is easy for students to 
imagine selecting different values for body type in different 
dating services —to be Slender in Match, Average in OK 
Cupid, and Proportional in JDate, for example —because 
the infrastructure is different, but also because the 
infrastructure indicates that the community and 
accompanying situation is different —and so daters, too, 
will have different identities in each. 
To continue this discussion in the classroom, I observe that 
it is of course possible to represent the concept of body type 
in other ways , perhaps as a set of quantitative 
measurements for height, weight, and the circum ference of 
various body parts. Wouldn’t that have some advantages? 
The data would be less subjective  and more interoperable  
[13, 32]. Invariably this is derided as a terrible idea. 
Someone often comments that people would lie. Imagine, I 
Data as Design Material
CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA
2955

PAGE 5
say, a system wher e your bathroom scale updates your 
profile automatically, along with sensors in your clothes to 
continually measure your waist, hips, and other body parts 
(not far -fetched with the Internet of Things ). People look 
aghast. That would be even more terrible! That’s weird, I 
observe. You mean you don’t want accurate data? It’s not 
that, the students say. What they mean is this: they’ve 
realized that the idea of body type as a performative, 
personal concept is more useful and illuminating in the 
dating context than body type as a set of quantitative 
measurements. Accuracy is both relative and insufficient.  
The ultimate lesson from this example, though, is not that 
certain kinds of data infrastructure (the performative, 
situational idea of body type) are designe d, while other 
implementations (the quantitative, universal idea of body 
type) are not designed, but that all data infrastructure is 
designed. As noted earlier, Redström uses the example of a 
chair to illustrate the distinctions between  “thing-design” 
and “use-design” [22]. Although designing a chair involves 
specifying a thing, it also involves the suggestion of certain 
activities to be performed with that thing: ways of sitting. 
The process of design might emphasize characteristics of 
the artifact or its uses. Determining the infrastructure for 
quantitative data collection generated by conventional -
seeming automatic means (like weight from a scale) might 
appear to involve few design decisions on the artifact axis, 
but such decisions of data infrastructure nonetheless specify 
quite distinct modes of use. Height and weight can be 
collected in a manner that is perhaps less subject to human 
interpretation than selecting from one of the Body Type 
vocabularies. But the design choice of using height and 
weight is not disinterested or neutral. Using height and 
weight to represent body type circumscribes a particular, 
situated idea of what “body type” means, and the activities 
that can be performed with height and weight data are 
different than the activities that ca n be performed with 
selections from the Body Type vocabularies. Deciding what 
data to collect, the form in which it is collected, and the 
means of collection —these are design decisions, in that 
they entail particular activities with the resulting artifact .  
The data infrastructure for ethnicity in the five online dating 
services illustrates this further (see Table 2). Particularly in 
the United States, the primary market for these dating sites, 
ethnicity and race are politically and socially fraught 
concepts. The experience of race and ethnicity varies 
widely in the U.S. population. White people don’t tend to 
notice social privileges accorded to their race, but people in 
historically oppressed groups are constantly reminded of 
racial disparities. To specify race/ethnicity categories in 
dating profiles and enable potential matches to be excluded 
or included based on these characteristics is to acknowledge 
these realities and to express a position on the social 
salience of particular group identities. The diffe rences 
between the five dating services demonstrate this. Black 
Planet labels this category Race, and not Ethnicity, and the 
values used for the Race category position physical 
appearance as primarily determining  the social experience 
of race.  Cultural experience is secondary to perception  of 
physical characteristics  in Black Planet —it’s how other 
people see you that is most important. In contrast, Match, 
OK Cupid, a nd Gluten- Free Singles distinguish groups 
according to cultural distinctions as well as phys ical 
appearance: Some East Indians (Indians, Pakistanis, 
Bangadeshis) might appear similar in physical appearance 
to some Middle Eastern people (Arabs, Egyptians, 
Iranians), but these groups are separated as culturally 
distinct. In this perspective it is n ot surprising that JDate, 
which targets a single cultural group —Jews—lacks a 
category for ethnicity or race , although there are non -white 
Jews of different national heritage s. To include such a 
category would be to deny the primacy of Jewishness as a 
group differentiator. As with body types, to quantify such 
data is to miss the point: representing race by, say, DNA 
markers of ancestry would be to express an entirely 
different concept,  one that facilitates quite different 
activities. Choosing to collect “dat a” in a particular f orm, 
with a particular proces s, expressed in a particular manner: 
these are design decisions, no matter how mundane and 
conventional such decisions might appear.  
If we take the A. Telier’s group’s  perspective of design as 
infrastructuring to facilitate dialogue- things, the 
conversations possible with race -as-DNA data are different 
than the conversations possible with data from ethnicity-as-
user-selected-labels [1]. The conversations facilitated by 
data infrastructure are not limited to users of the data 
created with that infrastructure: to people trying to find 
matches on dating sites. Other conversations involve the 
use of data infrastructure to collect data (in thi s example, 
people filling out profiles) and to aggregate data (the 
construction of sets of profiles within and across dating 
sites.) Data infrastructure provides a set of conditions under 
which design after design  can occur. The next sections look 
at collection and aggregation from this perspective.  
THE ROLE OF DESIGN I N DATA COLLECTION  
In this section, I describe a view of data collection as a form 
of design after design , where each act of data creation 
involves a dialogue with the data infrastructure  [22]. 
Redström’s concept of design after design aligns with 
empirical accounts of data collection. As discussed in the 
related work section, people collecting data interpret data 
infrastructure creativel y, flexibly, and situationally. Data 
infrastructure does  not determine data; it provides 
conditions under which people create data. In the context of 
data collection, data infrastructure is a design material.  
As a material , data infrastructure is  manipulated in diverse 
ways by different actors. An online dater  might select a 
body type aspirationally, realistically, or pessimistically. 
Relative consistency of interpretation with in a particular 
community can also change over time. Library catalogers 
today employ greater specificity and exhaustivity of 
indexing wh en applying subject headings to documents 
Data as Design Material
CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA
2956

PAGE 6
than in earlier eras ; there are more headings, and headings 
are more specific, than in the past  [7].  
Nonetheless, it remains slightly strange to conceive of data 
collection as design, just as it remains non -obvious to think 
of customizing one’s computer as design. One might 
recognize in the abstract  that customizing one’s computer 
is a form of design, but it doesn’t much seem like it whe n 
you’re installing a new application or changing settings.  
The same holds true for data collection. Although data 
collection does involve creative decision making, it is 
simultaneously banal  and tedious.  Think about your 
personal data collection : perhaps you track your menstrual 
cycle or take regular blood pressure readings . Without 
thinking much about them, y ou probably see these activities 
as rote and mechanistic . But i f you stop and consider the 
details of your practice, you’re also performing the se tasks 
with a degree of creativity and flexibility. I, for one, know 
that I interpret the data labels in the Clue menstrual tracking 
app in a way that is unique to me. I am manipulating data 
infrastructure as a material in a form of design after design. 
And yet—I wouldn’t call it design when I’m doing it.  
A design perspective on data collection acknowledges 
empirical realities of practice and enables innovative 
reconceptualizations of data creation and use. To continue 
this argument, I use evidence from a dataset created as a 
semester project in two separate courses for graduate 
students in a master’s program in information studies, 
conducted in spring and fall of 2015  (Course A and Course 
B). The dataset comprises records that describe a 
particularly compl ex information object: video games , 
which encompass tremendous diversity in form, structure, 
and content. The data infrastructure for the study include d a 
schema, documentation,  and vocabularies developed as a 
set of standards for video game description  [19, 20]. Using 
these data standards , student participants each described 7 
or 8 video games of their choice and 3 games common to 
all participants. After creating the data, students analyzed 
the data for their class and composed 3000 -word essays that 
assessed interpretive flexibility  in the aggregated data.  
Combined, the dataset from the two courses includes 282 
records, created by 26 student participants  (15 in Course A 
and 11 in Course B) . The schema used to describe the video 
games includes 45 elements for describing each game, 
including such disparate attributes as Mood, Platform, 
Price, Digital Rights Management, Visual Style, Networked 
Features, and Publisher. The dataset and its accompanying 
essays are useful evidence because the full provenance of 
each record is known: the data creator, the data 
infrastructure employed, and the immediate context (each 
course). Moreover, while some schema elements appear 
clearly interpretive (such as Mood or Visual Style), others 
appear much less so (such as Platform a nd Price). Like 
one’s use of a menstrual tracking app or blood pressure 
monitor, recording a video game’s price seems banal. 
Accordingly, Price is an illustrative example.  
In the video game schema documentation, instructions for 
the Price element are:  
Definition:  The manufact urer’s suggested retail price 
(MSRP) at time of initial release in the region where the 
game was released.  
Instruction: Determine the Manufacturer ’s Suggested 
Retail Price (MSRP) from the CSI. Record the price with 
the currency, source, and the date when this information 
was acquired. If unknown, specify “Unknown”. 
Example:  59.99 (USD, Amazon.com, 2014- 03-25) 
“CSI” means “chief source o f information.” The schema 
documentation lists primary and secondary choices for the 
CSI, inclu ding the game box (for games sold in separate 
packaging), the site where a downloadable game was 
obtained, and secondary game sites (including professional 
media, fan sites, and Wikipedia).   
For one of the 3 common games, Final Fantasy 7, the 
following was recorded for the Price element in Course A: 
• Blank 
• Unknown (2 times) 
• 4.99 
• 11.99 (3 times) 
• 14.99 (6 times) 
• 19.00 
• 149.99 
For the 1 2 entries that included price information, 7 
followed the basic structure of the suggested price format. 
Of the 5 remaining entries, 2 omitted a source and date, one 
omitted a source, one omitted a date, and one used a full 
URL instead of the source name. Of the 10 entries  that 
included a date , 8 indicated when the price information was 
acquired (in spring of 2015), as the schema documentation 
directs. One of the others was the release date. The final 
date was not in 2015, so it wasn’t when the price 
information was acquired, but it wasn’t the release date, 
either—its significance is unclear .    
The following price informati on was recorded for Final 
Fantasy 7 in Course B: 
• Blank (5 times) 
• Unknown 
• 11.99 
• 14.42 
• 14.99 (3 times) 
Of the 6 entries that included price information, none of the 
entries used the recommended price format. Three used a 
full URL instead of the source name. Three didn’t include a 
source. Five entries included a date; all of these indicated 
when the price information was acquired  (in fall of 2015).  
Where is the design in recording the price of Final Fantasy 
7 as Unknown, 11.99, 14.99, blank, or something else ? This 
Data as Design Material
CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA
2957

PAGE 7
seems like a fact that can only be accurate or inaccurate, but 
I suggest that it is something else: part of a dialogue with 
the data infrastructure regarding what games and prices are 
(thing-design) and what activities might be facilitated in 
describing price (use-design).  
In the video game schema, a  descriptive element like Price 
implies a certain level of abstraction in terms of 
documenting a game : an edition for a particular platform 
(such as Playstation 4 or iOS). The definition of Price in the 
schema documentation clarifies that price applies to a 
“release” in a “region” (the schema includes additional 
elements for Retail Release Date and Region Code). A 
release in a region suggests a level of abstraction similar to 
that of “manifestation” in the Functional Requirements for 
Bibliographic Records (FRBR) model  [15, 19]. A FRBR 
manifestation is a set of objects that include the same 
intellectual content and physical characteristics, such as the 
set of original LPs for Marvin Gaye’s What’s Going On?  on 
Tamia Records. For video games, it is reasonable to see a 
manifestation as something like Final Fantasy 7 for the 
Playstation 1 as released in the United States.  
But the schema documentation doesn’t specify a level of 
abstraction for creating data, an d other elements seem to 
apply equally to all editions, or to all editions with the same 
“intellectual content” but perhaps different “physical 
characteristics” (the “work” or “expression” level in 
FRBR). Mood and Visual Style, for example , would 
presumably be the same for versions of Final Fantasy 7 on 
Playstation or PC, and also the same for versions in  
Japanese or English . There is room for a data creator to 
make different choices about level of abstraction.  
Price intersects with level of abstraction mo re specifically 
as well. The schema directs creators to record the MSRP at 
the time of initial release. The first edition of Final Fantasy 
7 for Playstation 1 was released in 1997, but other editions 
of Final Fantasy 7 were available in 2015, when the data 
was collected . In developing the schema, Lee and 
colleagues sought to facilitate the information -seeking 
needs of a wide variety of  user types: serious and casual 
gamers, parents of young players, developers  and other 
industry professionals , collectors, s cholars and educators, 
and curators/librarians  [19]. In evaluating the schema, Lee 
and colleagues surveyed over 1200 respondents about the 
usefulness of each element in the schema , and price 
information was determined to be useful by the largest 
percentage of people (82  percent) [20]. But which price  is 
useful for whom ? The price that a particular seller was 
asking to purchase a particular copy of the game  when the 
data was created? The price that the manufacturer suggested 
for a particular version at the time of the game’s release —
which no one may have paid? Collectors and scholars are 
interested in games for different reasons than gamers and 
parents, and different kinds of prices may align better or 
worse with different uses of the data. More importantly, 
different data creators might come to different, equally 
defensible decisions based on the same goals and evidence.  
The diversity of approaches that Course A and Course B 
data creators took to im plement price information  
demonstrates this. Three creators described multiple 
editions in their records; these creators left Price blank or 
used Unknown, enabling them to  avoid listing multiple 
prices. Creators that indicated a price of 14.99 documented 
the first U.S. release of the game, for Playstation  1. Creators 
that indicated a price of 11.99 documented a PC version of 
the game available for streaming  in 2015, when data was 
collected. No one described the first release for PCs, from 
1998 (with a price  of 77.98). The strangely high price 
(149.99) is associated with the first U.S. release and is 
compatible with purchasing the original di scs for that 
release in 2015.  
Individual data creators tended to apply a reasonably 
consistent interpretation of price  throughout their own 
records, which indicates that these decisions were 
principled, not accidental . For example, data creator A02 
(from Course A) used the format “price-currency-release 
date” (“4.99 USD 1997 -01-31”) for all entries. This 
structure aligns with an interpretation that “MSRP” implies 
price information is necessarily associated with the release 
date, no matter when that information was recorded  (in 
other words, the manufacturer sets the MSRP at time of 
release, and it doesn’t change after that) . 
For apparently objective elements like Price, creators were 
unsettled by the diversity of approaches to implementing 
the data infrastructure of the schem a, even if they were 
individually consistent and principled in their actions . In 
their essays, many suggested changes to the schema and its 
documentation to constrain the interpretive flexibility  they 
observed. Creator A09 proposed that that “the more 
objective the element, the less semantic  diversity [should 
be] allowed,” and oth ers made similar assessments. Many 
creators suggested that the schema documentation should 
clearly specify a level of abstraction for description.  
Such proposals constitute a typical response to situations 
like the Price element: to build more data infras tructure to 
make the data collection ta sk require less interpretation and 
restrict opportunities to adapt the intended thing -design of 
infrastructure developers [an approach advocated in 1 7]. 
Indeed, a subsequent version of the video game schema 
specifies a set of entities (such as series, franchise, and 
edition) to establish and relate video game versions. But 
increasing the complexity of data infrastructure makes it 
more difficult for creators to implement , thus displacing the 
locus of interpretive flexib ility without diminishing it. It is 
also possible to constrain the intended use -design of the 
data: if we were only selling games, then the price is the 
seller’s current offer , about which there is less variability.  
This limits the data’s utility for aggre gation and reuse in 
other contexts, however —one of our primary goals with 
data. Moreover, experience demonstrates that variability 
Data as Design Material
CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA
2958

PAGE 8
will never be entirely contained. Any  position that data 
creation can be perfectly specified contradicts our vast, 
cross-disciplinary empirical evidence regarding data 
collection practices.   
In contrast, understanding data creation as a process of 
design after design allows us to imagine working with, 
rather than against, inevitabilities of interpretive flexibility. 
For example,  instead of designing data infrastructure that 
specifies a correct level of abstraction for a certain kind of 
data (to establish that prices must refer to individual copies 
of a game or that moods must refer to all versions of a game 
release), one could de sign data infrastructure that enables 
data creators to set the level of abstraction for any statement 
(so that a price could refer to a large set of versions and a 
mood could refer to one person’s individual copy). In other 
words, we might purposefully design data infrastructure to 
function more directly as  design material —to support a 
range of possibilities for data creation , just like we desig n 
computer interfaces to function as material for new ways of 
working and living with devices.  
This kind of ap proach might seem strange in regards to 
data—isn’t data useful when it is reliable and consistent, 
not when it is interpretively creative and potentially 
ambiguous or contradictory? If we aren’t sure what data 
means, then how can we trust it, or even use i t, when it ’s 
aggregated? The following section demonstrates how 
aggregated data can be interpretively creative and still 
useful, if we think about utility in a slightly different way.  
THE ROLE OF DESIGN I N DATA AGGREGATION  
The “data” we use is invariably the product of multiple acts 
of data creation. Just as all data requires infrastructure to be 
intelligible, it requires aggregation to be meaningful. 
Tracking the number of steps you take in a day is worthless 
unless you compare that number to a reference standard, 
and tracking the steps taken in one single day provides little 
information about overall activity or fitness. Although all 
data involves some type of aggregation, the digital 
environment increases the potential s cale of aggregation 
tremendously. (A common assertion regarding “big data” is 
that this increase in scale is so vast as to be revolutionary.)  
The standard approach to aggregation involves making each 
data source compatible in both syntax and semantics [13, 
32]. One data source is then mapp ed to another,  or multiple 
data sources are mapped to a common structure. 
Standardized data infrastructure and controlled 
implementation of data collection are often employed to 
facilitate aggregation. Especially in large -scale aggregation, 
datasets might be “cleaned” to transform inconsistencies or 
remove problematic variation. Cleaning can be automatic or 
manual. Kansa, Kansa, and Arbuckle describe the extensive 
work of human data editors, with the assistance of some 
automatic tools,  to aggregate 17 zooar cheology datasets 
from central and western Neolithic  Turkey [17]. Although  
data creators had employed similar data infrastructure , they 
had implemented it differently, and mapping from one 
dataset to another was not trivial.  
The example of Final Fantasy 7’s price from the previous 
section illustrates this well. Data creators made different 
decisions in implementing the data infrastructure that 
resulted in different understandings of price and the entity it 
refers to (a unique item; the game as released for the 
Playstation 1 in the U.S. in 1997; the game as released for 
the Playstation 1 in the U.S. 1997 as available in 2015  for 
streaming on a compute r; and so on). Some data creators 
rejected the data infrastructure’s conceptual ization of price, 
leaving the information blank or using the value Unknown.  
To clean this data, a typical approach would take the 
predominant level of abstraction for video games associated 
with price and map all the data to that level of abstraction: 
for example, to make price associated with a set of versions 
released on the same date in the same locality for the same 
platform (the version for Playstation 1 in the U.S. in 1997 
or the streaming version for PCs in all localities in 201 5). 
Records that incl uded data for multiple such versions could 
be split apart. Records that included data for individual 
items could be mapped upwards to the appropriate level of 
abstraction. Such mapping operations enable data to be 
more reliably compared and are often descr ibed as reducing 
noise or errors.  But these cleaning transformations 
necessarily involve simplifying assumptions. In this 
approach, some data would be thrown away, such as price 
information for individual items (the 149.00 price for a 
current set of individual Playstation 1 discs). 
Understanding aggregation as yet another layer of design in 
data creation, I suggest, enables us to imagine alternate 
approaches to data integration and use. One kind of 
alternate approach might consider how to take advantage of 
variation in aggregated data, instead of suppressing 
variation. Although ambiguity in the level of abstraction 
associated with price makes it difficult to perform some 
kinds of operatio ns on the video game data, such as 
tracking price changes over time, this same ambiguity 
provides useful, interesting evidence of another sort: it 
empirically shows how  video games such as Final Fantasy 
7 are complex digital entities with many versions that differ 
in complex, intersecting ways. The ways that data creators 
have implemented price provides evidence for 
understanding the kinds of characteristics  (current 
availability, historical importance) that mark particularly 
salient version sets.  
Another example from the video game data illustrates this 
differently. This example looks at the Mood element, which 
is described as follows in the schema documentation:  
Definition:  The pervading atmosphere or tone of the 
video game which evokes or recalls a certain emotion or 
state of mind. 
Instruction:  Identify the prevailing mood(s) of the 
game according to the CSI; for most games, the experience 
Data as Design Material
CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA
2959

PAGE 9
of playing the game or watching the gameplay video may 
be the most reliable source of this information. Select the 
most appropriate term(s) from the CV for this element. If 
no mood is applicable, write N/A.  
“CV” indicates a controlled vocabulary, which was created 
as a part of the video game data infrastructure. Terms in this 
vocabulary included: 
Adventurous Horror Humorous Sad  
Aggressive Humorous Mysterious Sarcastic 
Competitive Imaginative Peaceful Sensual 
Comradery Immersive Quirky Solitary 
Cute Intense Romantic  
Here is how data creators in Course A applied these terms 
to another of the 3 common games, Journey .  
• Adventurous, Peaceful, Solitary 
• Comradery, Immersive 
• Comradery, Immersive, Peaceful, Solitary, 
Imaginative 
• Immersive 
• Immersive; Imaginative  
• Peaceful  
• Peaceful 
• Peaceful 
• Peaceful 
• Peaceful 
• Peaceful, Comradery 
• Peaceful, Comradery, Imaginative, Sad 
• Quirky, Peaceful 
• Solitary, Adventurous, Immersive, Meditative, 
Mystery 
What is most interesting here is not that a preponderance of 
creators (9 out of 14) described Journey’s mood as solely or 
partially Peaceful. It is that 5 out of 15 cr eators also found 
Journey to be solely or partially Immersive, and that there is 
only one instance of  overlap between these groups.   
The data from Course B shows similar patterns:  
• Blank (2 times) 
• Adventurous, Immersive 
• Adventurous, Immersive, Imaginative  
• Adventurous, Peaceful , Comradery 
• Adventurous, Peaceful , Imaginative 
• Peaceful 
• Peaceful 
• Peaceful, Adventurous  
• Peaceful, Quirky, Solitary  
• Solitary 
For data creators in Course B who implemented mood, a 
similar percentage (6 out of 9) found Journey to be solely  or 
partially Peaceful. Fewer creators found Journey to be 
Immersive (2 out of 9) but there was no overlap between 
Immersive or Peaceful. In Course B, a larger group (5 out 
of 9) characterized Journey as Adventurous, and this 
description occurred whether J ourney was also Immersive 
or Peaceful (as was true with Course A, where Adventurous 
was associated with both Immersive and Peaceful camps). 
A single creator in Course B, unique amongst all the 
suggestions of Journey’s mood, found it to be just Solitary. 
Across Course A and Course B, there were alternate 
invocations of Solitary (5 uses) and Comradery (also 5 
uses)—although one person did use these terms together.  
These patterns show that, for this data element, merely 
combining assigned Mood values and taki ng the most 
popular ones is not sufficient to understand how data 
creators interpret Journey’s mood. If you did that with this 
dataset, you’d describe Journey as Peaceful (15 uses), 
Adventurous (7 uses) and Immersive (7 uses). It’s only 
when looking at how  terms are used in combination that 
one sees Peaceful and Immersive as indicative of distinct 
interpretations of Journey’s mood, and not partially 
constituative of a single interpretation of Journey’s mood. 
We see this in alternate uses of Solitary and Comradery to a 
lesser degree. These patterns also demonstrate how some 
judgments appear across creation contexts (a number of 
creators across A and B describe Journey as only Peaceful) 
while others vary across them (Adventurous is more salient 
in Course B, as are blank values; creators that use 4 or more 
mood values are only associated with Course A).  
These kinds of observations do not establish a definitive 
answer regarding the mood of Journey or any other gam e. 
Indeed, such observations suggest that no single 
interpretation will ever account for the diversity of 
approaches to data creation that appear even in this tiny 
video game dataset.  Instead, these insights make use of data 
creators’ different data implem entation decisions —a form 
of design after design —which are made visible through the 
context provided by the experimental dataset. If we view  
data aggregation as part of an interlocking set of design 
layers, we can imagine approaches to  aggregation that enact 
further possibilities for tracing the subtleties of data 
creation and learning from them , rather than minimizing or 
erasing those subtleties.   
USING DATA, DESIGNING DATA: AN EXAMPLE  
I have presented data  as an evolving product of interlocking 
design decisions regarding infrastructure, collection, and 
aggregation. In this understanding, data takes on a new 
character with each use , as it is  manipulated to fit its new 
context. This perspective p rompts us to make use of data 
from a more active position: as always designers of data , 
never its mere appropriators.  
By understanding devices and applications for data 
collection, access, display, and visualization as 
infrastructuring in an ongoing, dynamic process of data 
creation, designers can devis e artifacts that negotiate and 
interrogate their relationships with data, acknowledging the 
Data as Design Material
CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA
2960

PAGE 10
artifact’s role in shaping data itself. As one example, 
Houben and colleagues ’ Physikit is set of 4 cubes that 
express ambient data visualizations  [14]. Each cube 
expresses data via a different physical modality: light, air 
flow, vibration, and rotation. Physikit includes a Web 
configuration tool for users to create rules that control each 
cube (so that air flow increases as data rises or that a light 
turns on when a certain threshold is reached). Physikit 
presents a clever approach to user -controlled, tangible 
visualization. But although the Physikit des igners describe 
the project as human -data design, Physikit is conceived as a 
conduit for data, not enmeshed with it. Physikit was 
“designed to work with any data,” and the data source used 
in the project field study —environmental data collected 
with the Smart Citizen sensor kit  (SCK)—was presented as 
an external plug -in. In the field study, the designers’ goal 
was to see how participant households would “use” Physikit 
cubes to understand SCK data.  
In my reading of the findings, participants’ activities with 
the cubes were directed toward understanding not just the 
data and the cubes, but the  relationships between SCK, 
data, and cubes, as implemented in the household setting. 
Participants “became increasingly suspicious about the 
accuracy of the kit” and tried to understand “how the data 
worked.” Such experiences reorient the object of design  for 
projects like Physikit . A design-oriented perspective on data 
suggests that Physikit is not just the cubes and the 
configuration tool; it’s the implementation of a specific 
dataset with the cubes and configuration tool, and the 
mechanisms for negotiating those relations. Physikit  is 
infrastructure for making data, not just visualizing it.  
Understanding Physikit and other projects in this way 
suggests a more active role for design in the data itself, as 
well as in its access and display. For example, Houben and 
colleagues describe  how parents in one household that used 
the Physikit devised a visualization rule to turn on the light 
cube when the noise measured by the SCK reached a 
certain level, to demonstrate to the ir children how loud they 
could be. According to Houben and colleag ues, t he plan 
“backfired” when the cube lit up for the mother more than 
the children, showing that she was the noisy one.   
Another interpretation of this situation , however, is that the  
noise data created by family members aligns differently 
with perceptions of loudness. The SCK sensors record noise 
levels in  decibels, a measurement that describes a ratio, 
often of power, between two sounds . Decibels, however, 
are not the only factor in h uman perception of loudness. A 
high-pitched sound may be perceived as louder than a 
deeper sound. A loud high-pitched sound is also unpleasant, 
whereas a loud deep sound is often perceived as having 
greater sonority . But all of this is situational also: the 
pulsing bass in a neighbor’s dance music is terrible when 
you’re try ing to sleep but invigorating when you’re getting 
ready to go out for the evening.    
In the Physikit, w hen the light cube turns on, the SCK 
sensor is always measuring higher decibels, but the 
loudness might vary —or some hearers might perceive the 
sound as louder than others . If the children’s voices are at a 
higher frequency than the parents’, for instance, the decibel 
level at which the parents become angry and frustrated is 
probably less than the decibel level at which the parents 
perceive themselves to be overly loud. As detected by the 
SCK sensor and visualized by Physikit, the noise data 
generated by parents and children may very well be 
different: that is, when the light goes on and the children are 
making the noise, they might be too loud, but when t he 
light goes on and the parents are making the noise, they 
might not be too loud —according to their ears, anyway —
even if the decibel levels are the same.  
How might Physikit examine this relationship between data, 
data creator, and data interpreter? One w ay might be to 
position the signal (the light) as a n implementation  
question, not a s a statement. The light is a cue to ask: is it 
too loud now? What are the qualities of sound that make it 
too loud? For whom are these qualities of sound 
problematic? In the context of aggregation, the salient 
question is not “Are we louder than other families?” but 
“How do different households understand and implement 
loudness?” The visualization can be a reconfigured as a 
mechanism to understand , contextualize,  and inter rogate 
loudness for particular environments .  
Of course, although there is an opportunity for projects such 
as Physikit to  examine particularities of data integration , 
adopting a design pers pective on data does not require such 
a focus.  There is no “using”  Physikit without a particular 
dataset, however, and that dataset will have a different 
character expressed through Physikit than it will through 
some other means. We can more explicitly  acknowledge 
and describe this kind of relationship in our design proj ects. 
This paper contr ibutes by promoting  an understanding of 
this dual relationship: as data plays a role in the design of  
devices like Physikit , devices like Physikit play an equal 
role in the ongoing design of data.  
Although we have long known t hat dat a is interpretively 
flexible and inherently situational , this knowing has been  
surprisingly difficult to reconcile with the doing of design , 
and with the ways that we explain and document design 
work. What are we doing to data when we are doing things 
with it? This paper provides a framework for describing our 
own roles in shaping data, even with mundane, innocuous -
seeming actions such as selecting a form of quantitative 
measurement, establishing a protocol for automatic data 
generation, or implementing a mechanism for combining 
datasets. When we are defini ng, collecting, and aggregating 
data, how are we redesigning it? This paper begins a 
conversation on how to more clearly articulate this kind of 
design work.  
Data as Design Material
CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA
2961

PAGE 11
REFERENCES 
1. A. Telier. (Thomas Binder, Giorgio De Michelis, Pelle 
Ehn, Giulio Jacucci, Per Linde a nd Ina Wagner.) 2011. 
Design Things. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
2. Kirsten Boehner and Carl DiSalvo. 2016. Data, Design 
and civics: an exploratory study of civic tech. In 
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems  (CHI '16)., 2970-2981. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858326  
3. Geoffrey Bowker. 2000. Biodiversity datadiversity. 
Social Studies of Science  30, 5: 643-683.  
4. Allyson Carlyle. 2015. The policeman’s beard was 
what? Representation and reality in knowledge 
organization and description. Proceedings of the 
iConference 2015. http://hdl.handle.net/2142/73642  
5. Andy Crabtree and Richard Mortier. 2015. Human data 
interaction: historical lessons from social studies and 
CSCW In: Proceedings of the 14th European 
Conference on Comput er Supported Cooperative 
Work. 1-20. 
6. Chris Elsden, Bettina Nissen, Andrew Garbett, David 
Chatting, David Kirk, and John Vines. 2016. 
Metadating: exploring the romance and future of 
personal data. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors i n Computing Systems  
(CHI '16), 685-698. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858173  
7. Melanie Feinberg. 2015. Genres without writers: 
information systems and distributed authorship. In 
Genre Theory in Information Studies, edited by J. 
Andersen. London: Emerald. 
8. Joel E. Fischer, Andy Crabtree, Tom Rodden, James A. 
Colley, Enrico Costanza, Michael O. Jewell, and 
Sarvapali D. Ramchurn. 2016. "Just whack it on until it 
gets hot": working with IoT data in the home. In 
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems  (CHI '16), 5933-5944. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858518  
9. Jonathan Furner. 2010. Philosophy and information 
studies. Annual Review of Information Science and 
Technology, 44: 161-200. 
10. William Gaver, Jacob Beaver, and Steve  Benford. 
2003. Ambiguity as a resource for design. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '03), 233-240. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/642611.642653  
11. William Gaver, Andy Boucher, Nadine Jarvis, David 
Cameron, Mark Ha uenstein, Sarah Pennington, John 
Bowers, James Pike, Robin Beitra, and Liliana Ovalle. 
2016. The Datacatcher: batch deployment and 
documentation of 130 location -aware, mobile devices 
that put sociopolitically -relevant big data in people's 
hands: polyphonic interpretation at scale. In 
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems  (CHI '16), 1597-1607. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858472  
12. Charles Goodwin. 1994. Professional vision. American 
Anthropologist 96(3): 606-633. 
13. Jane Greenberg. 2009. Metadata and digital 
information. In Bates, Marcia, and Mary Niles Maack 
(eds). Encyclopedia of Library and Information 
Sciences. 3rd ed. CRC Press. 
14. Steven Houben, Connie Golsteijn, Sarah Gallacher, 
Rose Johnson, Saskia Bakker, Nicola i Marquardt, Licia 
Capra, and Yvonne Rogers. 2016. Physikit: data 
engagement through physical ambient visualizations in 
the home. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems  (CHI '16)., 
1608-1619. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858059  
15. International Federation of Library Associations 
(IFLA). 1998. Functional requirements for 
bibliographic records (FRBR). 
http://www.ifla.org/files/assets/cataloguing/frbr/frbr_2
008.pdf 
16. Steven J. Jackson and Sarah Barbrow. 2015. Standards 
and/as innovation: protocols, creativity, and interactive 
systems development in ecology. In Proceedings of the 
33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI '15), 1769-1778. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702564  
17. Eric Kansa, Sarah Kansa, and Benjamin Arbuckle. 
2014. Publishing and pushing: mixing models for 
communicating research data in archeology. 
International Journal of Digital Curation 9,1: 57-70.   
18. Bruno Latour. 1999 . Pandora’s hope: essays on the 
reality of science studies.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.  
19. Jin Ha Lee, Hyerim Cho, Violet Fox, and Andrew 
Perti. 2013. User-centered approach in creating a 
metadata schema for video games and interactive 
media. Proceedings of the 13th ACM/IEEE -CS Joint 
Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL),  229-238. 
20. Jin Ha Lee, Rachel Clarke, and Andrew Perti. 2015 . 
Empirical evaluation of metadata for video games and 
interactive media. Journal for the Association of 
Information Science and  Technology (JASIST).  
21. Donald McMillan, Arvid Engström, Airi Lampinen, 
and Barry Brown. 2016. Data and the city. In 
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems  (CHI '16), 2933-2944. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858434  
22. Johan Redström. 2008. RE: definitions of use. Design 
Studies 29:4, 410–23. 
23. John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and 
Matthew Chalmers. 2014. Personal tracking as lived 
Data as Design Material
CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA
2962

PAGE 12
informatics. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM 
conference on Human factors  in computing systems 
(CHI '14), 1163-1172. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2556288.2557039  
24. Phoebe Sengers and Bill Gaver. 2006. Staying open to 
interpretation: engaging multiple meanings in design 
and evaluation. In P roceedings of the 6th conference on 
Designing Interactive systems (DIS '06),  99-108. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1142405.1142422  
25. Susan Leigh Star and James Griesemer. 1989. 
Institutional ecology, “translations” and boundary 
objects: amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s 
Museum of Vertebrat e Zoology, 1907-1939. Social 
Studies of Science 19, 3: 387-420.  
26. Alex S. Taylor, Siân Lindley, Tim Regan, David 
Sweeney, Vasillis Vlachokyriakos, Lillie Grainger, and 
Jessica Lingel. 2015. Data -in-place: thinking through 
the relations between data and community. In 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems  (CHI '15), 
2863-2872. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702558  
27. Peter Tolmie, Andy Crabtree, Tom Rodden, James 
Colley, and Ewa Luger. 2016. “This has to be the ca ts”: 
personal data legibility in networked sensing systems. 
In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on 
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing (CSCW '16), 491-502. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819992  
28. Cesar Torres, Jasper O'Leary, and  Eric Paulos. 2016. 
LiveObjects: leveraging theatricality for an expressive 
Internet of Things. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM 
Conference Companion Publication on Designing 
Interactive Systems  (DIS '16 Companion), 5 -8. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2908805.290 8807 
29. Ron Wakkary, Audrey Desjardins, and Sabrina Hauser. 
2016. Unselfconscious interaction: a conceptual 
construct. Interacting With Computers  28, 4: 501-520.  
30. Patrick Wilson. 1968. Two kinds of power: an essay on 
bibliographic control.  Berkeley and Los Angeles: 
University of California Press.  
31. Peter Worthy, Ben Matthews, and Stephen Viller. 
2016. Trust me: doubts and concerns living with the 
Internet of Things. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM 
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems  (DIS 
'16), 427-434. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2901790.2901890  
32. Marcia Zeng and Lois Mai Chan. 2009. Semantic 
interoperability. In Bates, Marcia, and Mary Niles 
Maack (eds). Encyclopedia of Library and Information 
Sciences. 3rd ed. CRC Press. 
Data as Design Material
CHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA
2963