PAGE 1
European Journal of Operational Research 48 (1990) 9-26 9 
North-Holland 
How to make a decision: 
The Analytic Hierarchy Process 
Thomas L. Saaty 
Joseph M. Katz Graduate School of Business, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA 
Abstract: This paper serves as an introduction to the Analytic Hierarchy Process - A multicriteria decision 
making approach in which factors are arranged in a hierarchic structure. The principles and the philosophy 
of the theory are summarized giving general background information of the type of measurement utilized, 
its properties and applications. 
Keywords: Decision, priority, rank, cost-benefit, scales, ratios 
1. How to structure a decision problem 
Perhaps the most creative task in making a 
decision is to choose the factors that are important 
for that decision. In the Analytic Hierarchy Proc- 
ess we arrange these factors, once selected, in a 
hierarchic structure descending from an overall 
goal to criteria, subcriteria and alternatives in 
successive levels. 
To a person unfamiliar with the subject there 
may be some concern about what to include and 
where to include it. When constructing hierarchies 
one must include enough relevant detail to: 
represent the problem as thoroughly as possi- 
ble, but not so thoroughly as to lose sensitivity to 
change in the elements; 
consider the environment surrounding the 
problem; 
identify the issues or attributes that contribute 
to the solution; and 
identify the participants associated with the 
problem. 
Arranging the goals, attributes, issues, and stake- 
holders in a hierarchy serves two purposes. It 
provides an overall view of the complex relation- 
ships inherent in the situation; and helps the deci- 
sion maker assess whether the issues in each level 
are of the same order of magnitude, so he can 
compare such homogeneous elements accurately. 
Received November 1989 
One certainly cannot compare according to size a 
football with Mr. Everest and have any hope of 
getting a meaningful answer. The football and Mt. 
Everest must be compared in sets of objects of 
their class. Later we give a fundamental scale of 
use in making the comparison. It consists of verbal 
judgments ranging from equal to extreme (equal, 
moderately more, strongly more, very strongly 
more, extremely more) corresponding to the verbal 
judgments are the numerical judgments (1, 3, 5, 7, 
9) and compromises between these values. We 
have completed compiling a dictionary of hier- 
archies pertaining to all sorts of problems, from 
personal to corporate to public. 
A hierarchy does not need to be complete, that 
is, an element in a given level does not have to 
function as an attribute (or criterion) for all the 
elements in the level below. A hierarchy is not the 
traditional decision tree. Each level may represent 
a different cut at the problem. One level may 
represent social factors and another political fac- 
tor to be evaluated in terms of the social factors or 
vice versa. Further, a decision maker can insert or 
eliminate levels and elements as necessary to 
clarify the task of setting priorities or to sharpen 
the focus on one or more parts of the system. 
Elements that have a global character can be 
represented at the higher levels of the hierarchy, 
others that specifically characterize the problem at 
hand can be developed in greater depth. The task 
of setting priorities requires that the criteria, the 
0377-2217/90/$03.50 © 1990 - Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. (North-Holland) 


PAGE 2
10 T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 
properties or features of the alternatives being 
compared, and the alternatives themselves are 
gradually layered in the hierarchy so that it is 
meaningful to compare them among themselves in 
relation to the elements of the next higher level. 
Finally, after judgments have been made on the 
impact of all the elements and priorities have been 
computed for the hierarchy as a whole, sometimes, 
and with care, the less important elements can be 
dropped from further consideration because of 
their relatively small impact on the overall objec- 
tive. The priorities can then be recomputed 
throughout, either with or without changing the 
remaining judgments. 
2. Scales of m e a s u r e m e n t -  Avoiding mere num- 
ber crunching 
One might argue the whole process of decision 
making is so unstructured and so amorphous that 
it is no use trying to be precise. One is then 
tempted to go further and conclude that "par- 
ticipant satisfaction" is the main objective of deci- 
sion making. Were this the case, then multicriteria 
decision making would be a simple matter of 
using ingenuity, supported with mathematical 
terminology, to improve numbers that please peo- 
ple. But different sets of arbitrary numbers are 
likely to result, producing different decisions, and 
we are right back where we started. One set of 
numbers pleases a group of people who might be 
equally pleased with another set of numbers that 
contradicts the recommendations of the first set. 
This is mere number crunching. If a decision 
support theory is to be trustworthy there must be 
uniqueness in the representation of judgments, the 
scales derived from these judgments, and the scales 
synthesized from the derived scales. 
Let us consider for a moment group interaction 
that often leads to certain expectations, sometimes 
arising from the very heat of the debate. Such a 
debate cannot always incorporate in its arguments 
the refinements resulting from the mathematical 
tradeoffs to ensure drawing valid conclusions. 
Sometimes participants accept a process and its 
outcome because the situation is so complex and 
the arguments so convoluted that whatever 
surfaces in the end appears plausible. Although 
convincing a group about its qualitative prefer- 
ences involves the politics of persuasion and of 
wheeling and dealing, it is essential that the deci- 
sion theory itself used to assist the group in arriv- 
ing at a decision be invariant to politics and 
behavior. It should be a science of scaling based 
on mathematics, philosophy and psychology. 
Among the various number crunching prac- 
tices, the most objectionable one is to assign any 
set of numbers to judgments on alternatives under 
a particular criterion, and then normalize these 
numbers (by multiplying them by a constant that 
is the reciprocal of their sum). Generally, different 
sets of numbers are used to scale the judgments 
for the alternatives under different criteria. All the 
new normalized sets now lie in the interval [0, 1], 
no matter what scale they originally came from, 
and can be passed off to the uninitiated as com- 
parable. The appealing part of this practice is that 
the numbers have an apparently uniform underly- 
ing structure and look not unlike probabilities. 
Thus they go unchallenged by the decision maker 
and are then manipulated by the consultant or 
facilitator who weights and adds them to find the 
most preferred alternative. 
Note that when the initial numbers assigned 
before normalization are ordinals, arbitrary num- 
bers that preserve order but carry no information 
about differences or ratios of relative magnitudes, 
the resulting transformation produces a new set of 
ordinals lying between zero and one and you can 
be sure only that it preserves the same order. The 
operations of weighting and adding cannot then 
be meaningful because it is very likely that differ- 
ent results will be produced for different choices 
of the ordinal numbers. By a judicious choice of 
ordinals one can make an alternative that is domi- 
nant on even one criterion, no matter how unim- 
portant that criterion may be, have the largest 
value after weighting and adding and thus turn 
out to be the most preferred. Any method such as 
this is not a decision theory but an approach that 
can mislead people. 
The Analytic Hierarchy Process is rigorously 
concerned with the scaling problem and what sort 
of numbers to use, and how to correctly combine 
the priorities resulting from them. A scale of 
measurement consists of three elements: A set of 
objects, a set of numbers, and a mapping of the 
objects to the numbers. In a standard scale a unit 
is used to construct the rest of the numbers of the 
scale. Examples of such a unit are the inch, the 
pound, the angstrom, and the dollar. A standard 


PAGE 3
T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 11 
scale can be used to measure object or events with 
respect to the property for which a scale is design- 
ed to measure. Since the unit is arbitrary, one can 
have different numbers to which the objects are 
mapped. Because a standard scale is not unique, it 
is important to interpret the meaning of the num- 
bers used in the scale. Thus, in general, the num- 
bers obtained from such a scale are merely stimuli 
for the memory (what it felt like the last time the 
temperature was - 1 5 ° C )  and have no intrinsic 
significance. However, most carefully designed 
standard scales are helpful in that they preserve 
certain numerical relations in the measurements 
(the mapping) of the objects, giving us a better 
way to interpret the stimuli they are measuring 
than arbitrary scales. 
A scale may or may not have zero for an origin. 
For example, a scale of ordinal numbers can begin 
with any number. A ratio scale, such as absolute 
temperature preserves origin. Interval scales, which 
measure the same phenomena like temperature, 
preserve linear relations, but may have different 
origins. Zero on the Fahrenheit scale is a different 
temperature than zero on the Celsius scale. Both 
are interval scales. Again, the numbers on these 
scales mean nothing unless one can recall situa- 
tions associated with the numerical readings being 
considered. They are just a convenient means of 
communicating characteristics of objects or situa- 
tions without everybody having to experience 
them. 
It often happens that the interpretations of 
numerical stimuli from a given standard scale 
differ depending on the circumstances. There is no 
simple rule that can be applied to interpret read- 
ings from even a single scale when it is applied to 
a natural phenomenon. Intensity of sun light has a 
different significance for different purposes. It 
may be useful for sunbathing, but too bright for 
reading. Similarly, a monotonic relation between 
successive readings from a standard scale do not 
assure us that even higher readings will be better 
(or worse). More (or less) temperature does not 
necessarily correspond to more (or less) useful- 
ness. Low temperatures are uncomfortable. As the 
readings rise, they become more comfortable and 
as they rise higher they can again become uncom- 
fortable. On the other hand, to preserve some 
foods, low temperatures are very desirable and as 
the readings rise, they become undesirable, and as 
they rise still higher they could become desirable 
again. Our values of comfort and desirability and 
other social effects have to be at the bottom of 
every interpretation and depend on higher goals 
that we may have in mind. 
For a large number of scales used in physics, it 
is implicitly assumed that the scale can be ex- 
tended out to infinity and applied to every imagin- 
able circumstance. In other words, interpretation 
in physics assumes events as homogeneous, no 
matter how near or far from the origin they may 
fall. What is most astonishing is the assumption in 
physics that objects yet unknown but with the 
same dimensional characteristics of the known 
objects being measured can in fact be measured in 
the same way. Realization of the different inter- 
pretations we can make of the same number in 
physics would indicate that when numbers fall 
outside the realm of experience it is logical to 
suspend the extension of the truth we construct 
from experience to a domain for which we have no 
knowledge and feeling. It would be mostly fictive 
speculation. 
In economics, the arithmetic value of a dollar is 
assumed to be the same no matter whether a 
person has only one or a million dollars. But in 
reality it is not. To buy a new Mercedes, ten 
dollars and one hundred dollars are nearly equally 
inadequate or useless as down payments. On the 
other hand, for buying groceries, a hundred dol- 
lars is much more useful, practically ten times 
more useful than ten dollars. The first thousand 
dollars earned is much more important than the 
first thousand dollars earned after a million. 
We must be constantly and carefully attentive 
to how we interpret data from scales. Standard 
scales force on us a way of thinking that is not in 
complete harmony with the way we really feel 
about what they are measuring. 
There is a more general method of measure- 
ment that does not make use of standard scales. It 
is the method of relative measurements useful for 
properties for which there is no standard scale of 
measurement (love, political clouL straightness). 
These are known as intangible properties. The 
number of such properties is extremely large. We 
can scarcely hope to device standard scales for 
them all. We are driven to relative scales, and a 
surprising thing is that they can serve as a stand- 
ard for how to handle the very few standard scales 
we have, and not the other way round. A remarka- 
ble aspect of relative scales is that they can use 


PAGE 4
12 T . L  Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 
information from standard scales when there is a 
particular need to do so. Measurements in a 
standard ratio scale are transformed to meas- 
urements in a relative ratio scale by normalizing 
them. 
This conversion process gives us a hint about 
the difference between the two kinds of scales. A 
relative scale for a property is generated for a 
specific set of entities or objects. A standard scale 
for a property is always out there ready to be 
called into use. More significantly, a relative scale 
is essential to represent priority or importance if 
one is generating the scale by making direct ob- 
servations and judgments about the property un- 
der study. It is also useful when one is interpreting 
what the data from a standard scale really signify. 
Relative scales are always needed to represent 
subjective understanding. More is said about 
arithmetic relations between the two types of scales 
in Sections 8 and 12. 
3. Paired comparisons as ratios 
When we measure something with respect to a 
property, we usually use some known scale for 
that purpose. A basic contribution to the subject 
of this paper, the Analytic Hierarchy Process 
(AHP) is how to derive relative scales using judg- 
ment or data from a standard scale, and how to 
perform the subsequent arithmetic operation on 
such scales avoiding useless number crunching. 
The judgments are given in the form of paired 
comparisons [6,7,8]• One of the uses of a hierarchy 
is that it allows us to focus judgment separately on 
each of several properties essential for making a 
sound decision• The most effective way to con- 
centrate judgement is to take a pair of elements 
and compare them on a single property without 
concern for other properties or other elements. 
This is why paired comparisons in combination 
with the hierarchical structure are so useful in 
deriving measurement. We also note that some- 
times comparisons are made on the basis of stand- 
ards established in memory through experience or 
training. 
Assume that we are given n stones, A t , . . .  , An, 
whose weights w I ..... w,, respectively, are known 
to us. Let us form the matrix of pairwise ratios 
whose rows give the ratios of the weights of each 
stone with respect to all others. Here the smaller 
A 1 
AI wl/w~ 
A2 w2/wl 
A ,  w n / w  1 
{Wwl W2 
~ - n  
of each pair of stones is used as the unit, and the 
larger one is measured in terms of multiples of 
that unit. It is difficult to do the inverse compari- 
son without again using the smaller stone as the 
unit. This is a sort of bias in human thinking, 
which leads to considering a nonsymmetrical out- 
come and the inclination not to force symmetry 
on it. We have the matrix equation: 
A 2  . . . A n  
wl/w2 " "  Wl/W. I 
W 1 I 
Wa/W2 ... wjwo l w? 
w./w2 ... w./wn ] w. 
The foregoing formulation has the advantage of 
giving us the solution• But it also gives rise to a far 
reaching theoretical interpretation. We have multi- 
plied A on the right by the vector of weights 
w = ( % ,  w 2 . . . . .  wn) x. The result of this multipli- 
cation is nw. If n is an eigenvalue of A, then w is 
the eigenvector associated with it. Now A has rank 
one because every row is a constant multiple of 
the first row. Thus all its eigenvalues except one 
are zero. The sum of the eigenvalues of a matrix is 
equal to its trace, the sum of the diagonal ele- 
ments, and in this case, the trace of A is equal to 
n. Therefore, n is the largest, or principal, eigen- 
value of A. 
The solution of A w  = nw, called the principal 
right eigenvector of A, consists of positive entries 
and is unique to within a multiplicative constant. 
To make w unique, we normalize its entries by 
dividing by their sum. It is clear that if we are 
given the comparison matrix A, we can recover 
the scale. In this case the solution is the normal- 
ized version of any column of A. 
The matrix A = ( a i j ) ,  a i j = w i / w j ,  i, j =  
1 ..... n, has positive entries everywhere and satis- 
fies the reciprocal property aji = 1 / a i j .  Any ma- 
trix with this property is called a reciprocal ma- 
trix. In addition, A is consistent because the fol- 
lowing condition is satisfied: 
aj~ = a i k / a i j ,  i, j ,  k = 1 . . . . .  n. (1) 


PAGE 5
T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 13 
We see that the entire matrix can be constructed 
from a set of n elements which form a chain (or 
more generally, a spanning tree, in graph-theoretic 
terminology) across the rows and columns. 
It is easy to prove that a consistent matrix must 
have the ratio form A = (wJwj), i, j = 1 . . . . .  n. A 
necessary condition for consistency is that A be 
reciprocal. We show below that a necessary and 
sufficient condition for consistency is that the 
principal eigenvalue of A be equal to n, the order 
of A. When A is inconsistent, these two observa- 
tions serve to help us derive a ratio scale whose 
ratios are close to those of an underlying scale 
w -- (w I ..... w,). The reciprocal axiom of the AHP 
ensures that perturbations of a ratio scale are 
themselves reciprocal. The homogeneity axiom en- 
sures for the inconsistent case that the perturba- 
tions would be small, and hence that the two 
principal eigenvalues are close, from which it 
would follow by an argument given in [14, p. 671 
that the derived scale is close to an underlying 
ratio scale. In addition, this second axiom enables 
us to explore the improvement of some of the 
judgments, thus also the improvement of incon- 
sistency and the scale approximation. But there 
still remains the question of order preservation. 
The method we use to derive the scale must not 
only yield a ratio scale, but also capture the order 
inherent in the judgments, a very strong require- 
ment indeed. 
In a general decision-making environment, we 
cannot give the precise values of the w,/w) but 
only estimates of them. Let us consider estimates 
of these values given by an expert who may make 
small errors in judgment. It is known from eigen- 
value theory [14], that a small perturbation around 
a simple eigenvalue, as we have in n when A is 
consistent, leads to an eigenvalue problem of the 
form Aw=)tmaxW where Xma x is the principal 
eigenvalue of A where A may no longer be con- 
sistent but is still reciprocal. The problem now is: 
to what extent does w reflect the expert's actual 
opinion? Note that if we obtain w by solving this 
problem, and then form a matrix with the entries 
( w , / w j ) ,  we obtain an approximation to A by a 
consistent matrix. 
We now show the interesting, and perhaps 
surprising result that inconsistency throughout 
the matrix can be captured by a single number 
X m~x- n, which measures the deviation of the 
judgments from the consistent approximation. 
Let a , j = ( 1  +6~j)wJ~*), 6~j> - 1 ,  be a per- 
turbation of w y w j ,  where w is the principal eigen- 
vector of A. 
Theorem 1. Xmax > /  g/" 
Proof: Using aj, = 1 / a j i ,  and A w - - X  .... w, we 
have 
I a, 2 
- = -  ~ l + 6 , j  >~0" [] (2) ~max n n l ~ i < j ~ n  
Theorem 2. A is consistent if and only if )~ m a x  = ?Z. 
Proof. If A is consistent, then because of (1), each 
row of A is a constant multiple of a given row. 
This implies that the rank of A is one, and all but 
one of its eigenvalues Xi, i = 1, 2 ..... n, are zero. 
However, it follows from our earlier argument that 
F~= iX, = Trace(A) = n. Therefore, X m a x  = n. Col3- 
versely, Xm, x = n implies 6,j = 0, and a~j = w y w j .  
[] 
For the consistency index (CI), we adopt the 
value (kin, X - n ) / ( n -  1). It is the negative aver- 
age of the other roots of the characteristic poly- 
nomial of A. This value is compared with the 
same index obtained as an average over a large 
number of reciprocal matrices of the same order 
whose entries are random. If the ratio (called the 
consistency ratio CR) of CI to that from random 
matrices is significantly small (carefully specified 
to be about 10% or less), we accept the estimate of 
w. Otherwise, we attempt to improve consistency. 
The reader may know about the experimental 
findings of the psychologist George Miller in the 
1950's [4]. He found that in general, people (such 
as chess experts) could deal with information in- 
volving simultaneously only a few facts, seven plus 
or minus two, he wrote. With more, they become 
confused and cannot handle the information. This 
is in harmony with the stability of the principal 
eigenvalue to small perturbations when n is small 
[7,14], and its central role in the measurement of 
consistency. 
Vargas [12] studied the case where the coeffi- 
cients of the matrix are random variables. He 
focused his attention on gamma distributed coeffi- 
cients and derived a Dirichlet distribution for the 
components of the eigenvector when the matrix is 


PAGE 6
14 T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 
consistent. When the matrix is inconsistent, the 
10% consistency bound is a sufficient measure to 
ensure that the eigenvector follows the Dirichiet 
distribution with given parameters which can be 
computed from the corresponding consistent ma- 
trix. The gamma assumption is a powerful one 
because of the inherent density of linear combina- 
tions of these distributions. 
4. Two examples 
The AHP is used with two types of measure- 
ment, relative and absolute, the latter having to do 
with memory standards mentioned above. In both, 
paired comparisons are performed to derive prior- 
ities for criteria with respect to the goal. In rela- 
tive measurement, paired comparisons are per- 
formed throughout the hierarchy including on the 
alternatives in the lowest level of the hierarchy 
with respect to the criteria in the level above. In 
absolute measurement, paired comparisons are 
also performed through the hierarchy with the 
exceptions of the alternatives themselves. The level 
just above the alternatives consists of intensities or 
grades which are refinements of the criteria or 
subcriteria governing the alternatives. One pair- 
wise compares the grades themselves under each 
criterion by answering questions such as: How 
much better is a student applicant with excellent 
grades than one with very good grades? and how 
much better is a student applicant with average 
letters of recommendation than one with poor 
ones? and so on. The alternatives are not pairwise 
compared, but simply rated as to what category in 
which they fall under each criterion. A weighting 
and summing process yields their overall ranks. 
This will become clear in the second example 
below. There is no reason why forcing standards 
on a problem should produce the same outcome 
obtained through relative measurement. These are 
two different descriptive (what can be) and 
normative (what should be) settings. 
4.1. Relative measurement: Choosing the best house 
to buy 
When advising a family of average income to 
buy a house, the family identified eight criteria 
which they thought they had to look for in a 
house. These criteria fall into three categories: 
economic, geographic and physical. Although one 
may have begun by examining the relative impor- 
tance of these clusters, the family felt they wanted 
to prioritize the relative importance of all the 
criteria without working with clusters. The prob- 
lem was to decide which of three candidate houses 
to choose. The first step is the structuring of the 
problem asa hierarchy. 
In the first (or top) level is the overall goal of 
'Satisfaction with house'. In the second level are 
the eight criteria which contribute to the goal, and 
the third (or bottom) level are the three candidate 
houses which are to be evaluated in terms of the 
criteria in the second level. The definitions of the 
criteria follow and the hierarchy is shown in Fig- 
ure 1. 
The criteria important to the individual family 
were: 
(1) Size of house: Storage space; size of rooms, 
number of rooms; total area of house. 
(2) Location to bus lines: Convenient, close bus 
service. 
SAT, SFACTION WIT""OUSE] 
Figure 1. Decomposition of the problem into a hierarchy 


PAGE 7
T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 15 
Table l 
The fundamental scale 
Intensity of importance Definition Explanation 
on an absolute scale 
1 Equal importance 
3 Moderate importance of 
one over another 
5 Essential or strong impor- 
tance 
7 Very strong importance 
9 
2 , 4 , 6 , 8  
Reciprocals 
Rationals 
Extreme importance 
Intermediate values be- 
tween the two adjacent 
judgments 
Two activities contribute equally to the objective 
Experience and judgment strongly favor one activity over another 
Experience and judgement strongly favor one activity over another 
An activity is strongly favored and its dominance demonstrated in 
practice 
The evidence favoring one activity over another is of tile highest 
possible order of affirmation 
When compromise is needed 
If activity i has one of the above numbers assigned to it when compared with activity j, then j has 
the reciprocal value when compared with i 
Ratios arising from the scale If consistency were to be forced by obtaining n numerical values to 
span the matrix 
(3) Neighborhood: Little traffic, secure, nice 
view, low taxes, good condition of neighborhood. 
(4) Age of house: Self-explanatory. 
(5) Yard space: Includes front, back and side, 
and space from neighbors. 
(6) Modern facilities: Dishwashers, garbage dis- 
posals, air conditioning, alarm system, and other 
such items possessed by a house. 
(7) General condition: Repairs needed, walls, 
carpet, drapes, cleanliness, wiring. 
(8) Financing available: Assumable mortgage; 
seller financing available, or bank financing. 
The second step is the elicitation of pairwise 
comparison judgments. Arrange the elements in 
the second level into a matrix and elicit judgments 
from the people who have the problem about the 
relative importance of the elements with respect to 
the overall goal, Satisfaction with House. The 
scale to use in making the judgments is given in 
Table 1. This scale has been validated for effec- 
tiveness, not only in many applications by a num- 
ber of people, but also through theoretical com- 
parisons with a large number of other scales. 
The questions to ask when comparing two 
Table 2 
Pairwise comparison matrix for level 1 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Priority 
vector 
I I 
1 1 5 3 7 6 6 ~ a 0.173 
I 1 I 
2 ~ 1 ~ 5 3 3 t ~ 0.054 
I 
3 ~ 3 1 6 3 4 6 ~, 0.188 
4 t 7 i 1 i i ; i 6 1 3 a v ~ 0.018 
5 ~ ~ ~ ~ ; 3 3 3 1 ~ 5 6 0.031 
6 ~ ~ ~ ~ a 4 2 1 ~ 6 0.036 
1 I 
7 3 5 ~ 7 5 5 1 ~ 0.167 
8 4 7 5 8 6 6 2 1 0.333 
~'max = 9.669, CI = 0.238, CR ~ 0.169 


PAGE 8
16 T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 
criteria are of the following kind: of the two 
criteria being compared, which is considered more 
important by the family buying the house with 
respect to the overall goal of family satisfaction 
with the house? 
When the elements being compared are closer 
together than indicated by the scale, one can use 
the scale 1.1, 1.2 ..... 1.9. If still finer, one can use 
the appropriate percentage refinement. 
The matrix of pairwise comparisons of the 
criteria given by the homebuyers in this case is 
shown in Table 2, along with the resulting vector 
of priorities. The vector of priorities is the prin- 
cipal eigenvector of the matrix. It gives the relative 
priority of the criteria measured on a ratio scale. 
In this case financing has the highest priority with 
33% of the influence. 
In Table 2, instead of naming the criteria, we 
use the number previously associated with each. 
Next we move to the pairwise comparisons of the 
elements in the lowest level. The elements to be 
compared pairwise are the houses with respect to 
how much better one is than the other is satisfying 
each criterion in level 2. Thus there will be eight 
3 x 3 matrices of judgments since there are eight 
elements in level 2, and 3 houses to be pairwise 
compared for each element. Again, the matrices 
contain the judgments of the family involved. To 
understand the judgments, a brief description of 
the houses follows. 
House A. This house is the largest of them all. 
It is located in a neighborhood with little traffic 
and low taxes. Its yard space is comparably larger 
than houses B and C. However, the general condi- 
tion is not very good and it needs cleaning and 
painting. Also, the financing is unsatisfactory be- 
cause it would have to be bank-financed at high 
interest. 
House B. This house is a little smaller than 
House A and is not close to a bus route. The 
neighborhood gives one the feeling of insecurity 
because of traffic conditions. The yard space is 
Table 3 
Comparison matrices and local priorities 
Size of house A B C Priority Y a r d  space A B C Priority 
vector vector 
A 
B 
C 
Transportation 
1 6 8 0.754 A 1 5 4 0.674 
I 1 4 0.181 B -~ 1 ½ 0.101 
I 1 1 z 1 0.065 C z 3 1 0.226 
~ m a x  = 3.136, CI = 0.068, C R  = 0.117 ~kma x = 3.086, CI = 0.043, C R  = 0.074 
A B C Priority M o d e m  A B C Priority 
vector facilities vector 
A 
B 
C 
Neighborhood 
1 7 ½ 0.233 A 1 8 6 0.747 
1 1 1 1 1 ~ 0.005 B ~ 1 5 0.060 
1 5 8 1 0.713 C ~ 5 1 0.193 
~kma x = 3.247, CI = 0.124, C R  = 0.213 ~max = 3.197, CI = 0.099, C R  = 0.170 
A B C Priority General A B C Priority 
vector condition vector 
A 
B 
C 
Age of house 
I 1 
1 8 6 0.745 A 1 ~ ~ 0.200 
1 1 1 0.065 B 2 1 1 0.400 g 
1 4 1 0.181 C 2 1 1 0.400 
h m a  x = 3.130, CI = 0.068, C R  = 0.117 ~ m a x  = 3 . 0 0 0 ,  C I  = 0 . 0 0 0 ,  C R  = 0 . 0 0 0  
A B C Priority Financing A B C Priority 
vector vector 
A 
B 
C 
| 1 0 . 0 7 2  1 1 1 0.333 A 1 v 
1 1 1 0.333 B 7 1 3 0.650 
1 1 1 1 0.333 C 5 3 1 0.278 
?~max = 3.000, c f =  0.000, C R  = 0.000 ~max = 3.065, CI = 0.032, C R  = 0.056 


PAGE 9
TL. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 17 
Table 4 
Local and global priorities 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
(0.173) (0.054) (0.188) (0.018) (0.031) (0.036) (0.167) (0.333) 
A 0.754 0.233 0.754 0.333 0.674 0.747 0.200 0.072 0.396 
B 0.181 0.055 0.065 0.333 0.101 0.060 0.400 0.650 0.341 
C 0.065 0.713 0.181 0.333 0.226 0.193 0.400 0.278 0.263 
fairly small and the house lacks the basic modern 
facilities. On the other hand, the general condition 
is very good. Also, an assumable mortgage is 
obtainable which means the financing is good with 
a rather low interest rate. 
House C. House C is very small and has few 
modern facilities. The neighborhood has high 
taxes, but is in good condition and seems secure. 
The yard space is bigger than that of House B, but 
is not comparable to House A's spacious sur- 
roundings. The general condition of the house is 
good and it has a pretty carpet and drapes. 
The matrices of comparisons of the houses with 
respect to the criteria and their local priorities are 
given in Table 3. 
The third step is to establish the composite or 
global priorities of the houses. We lay out the 
local priorities of the house with respect to each 
criterion in a matrix and multiply each column of 
vectors by the priority of the corresponding crite- 
rion and add across each row which results in the 
desired vector of the houses in Table 4. House A 
which was the least desirable with respect to fi- 
nancing (the highest priority criterion), contrary to 
expectation, had the largest priority. It was the 
house that was bought. 
4.2. Absolute measurement: Employee evaluation 
Absolute measurement is applied to rank alter- 
natives in terms of ratings, intensities or grades of 
the criteria. These grades may take the form: 
excellent, very good, good, average, below average, 
poor and very poor. After establishing a scale of 
priorities for the criteria (or subcriteria, if there 
are some) through paired comparisons, the grades 
which may be different for each criterion or sub- 
criterion~ are in turn pairwise compared according 
Table 5 
The hierarchy of employee evaluation 
Goal: 
Criteria: Technical 
Intensities: 
Employee performance evaluation 
Maturity Writing Verbal Timely Potential 
skills skills work (personal) 
(0.061) (0.196) (0.043) (0.071) (0.162) (0.466) 
Excell. Very Excell. Excell. Nofollup Great 
(0.604) (0.731) (0.733) (0.750) (0.731) (0.750) 
Abv. avg. Accep. Avg. Avg. On time Averag. 
(0.245) (0.188) (0.199) (0.171) (0.188) (0.171) 
Avg. Immat. Poor Poor Remind Bel. avg. 
(0.105) (0.181) (0.068) (0.078) (0.081) (0.078) 
Bel. avg. 
(0.046) 
Alternatives: 
(1) Mr. X Excell. Very Avg. Excell. On time Great 
(2) Ms. Y Avg. Very Avg. Avg. Nofollup Avg. 
(3) Mr. Z ExceU. Immat. Avg. Excell. Remind Great 


PAGE 10
18 T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 
to their parent criterion. An alternative is 
evaluated, for each criterion or subcriterion, by 
identifying the grade which best describes it. Fi- 
nally, the weighted or global priorities of the grades 
are added to produce a ratio scale for the alterna- 
tive. Absolute measurement needs standard to 
make it possible to judge whether the alternative is 
acceptable or not. Absolute measurement is useful 
in student admission, faculty tenure and promo- 
tion, employee evaluation, and in other areas where 
there is fairly good agreement on standard which 
are then used to rate alternatives one at a time. 
Let us consider an abbreviated version of the 
problem of evaluating employee performance. The 
hierarchy for the evaluation and the priorities 
derived through paired comparisons are shown 
below. It is then followed by a rating of each 
employee for the quality of performance under 
each criterion and summing the resulting scores of 
obtain his overall rating. The hierarchy in Table 5 
can be more elaborate, including subcriteria, fol- 
lowed by the intensities for expressing quality. 
Let us now show how to obtain the total score 
for Mr. X (see Table 5): 
0.061 X 0.604 + 0.196 X 0.731 + 0.043 × 0.199 
+ 0.071 x 0.750 + 0.162 X 0.188 
+ 0.466 x 0.750 = 0.623. 
Similarly the score for Ms. Y and Mr. Z can be 
shown to be 0.369 an 0.478 respectively. It is clear 
that we can rank any number of candidates along 
these lines. Here the vector of priorities of the 
criteria has been weighted by the vector of relative 
number of intensities under each criterion and 
then renormalized. We call this a structural rescal- 
ing of the priorities. 
5. Theoretical considerations [7] 
There is a well known principle in mathematics 
that is widely practiced, but seldom enunciated 
with sufficient forcefulness to impress its impor- 
tance. A necessary condition that a procedure for 
solving a problem be a good one is that if it 
produces desired results, and we perturb the varia- 
bles of the problem in some small sense, it gives us 
results that are 'close' to the original ones. This is 
precisely the use of continuity and uniform con- 
tinuity--to assure that after transforming a varia- 
ble, originally nearby values go over to nearby 
values. An extension of this philosophy in prob- 
lems where order relations between the variables 
are important, is that on small perturbations of 
the variables, the procedure produces close, order 
preserving results. The procedure described here 
has this characteristic. 
Because of the natural way in which a matrix of 
ratios and small perturbations of that matrix lead 
to a principal eigenvalue problem, one may start 
with this and generalize to positive matrices that 
need not be reciprocal. The German mathemati- 
cian Oskar Perron proved in 1907 that, if A - -  
( a i j ) ,  a u > O, i, j = 1 . . . . .  n, then A has a simple 
positive eigenvalue ~m~x (called the principal ei- 
genvalue of A) and ~kma x ~> ]~k k I for the remaining 
eigenvalues of A. Furthermore, the principal ei- 
genvector w = (w I ..... w,) v that is a solution of 
A w  = ~m~x w has w~ > 0, i = 1,..., n. We can write 
the norm of the vector w as I l w l l = e T w  where 
e = (1, 1 ..... 1) T and we can normalize w by divid- 
ing it by its norm. For uniqueness, when we refer 
to w we mean its normalized form. Our purpose 
here is to show how important the principal eigen- 
vector is in determining the rank of the alterna- 
tives through dominance walks. 
We have seen that ratio scale estimation has a 
natural setting in principal eigenvalue formula- 
tion. We will now show that in addition, the 
principal eigenvector also has the order preserving 
properties we seek. 
When A is consistent, one way to define the 
order of the alternatives is to require that one row 
of the matrix dominate elementwise another row. 
But when A is inconsistent it is no longer possible 
to define dominance in this manner. Instead, we 
borrow the concept of dominance from graph 
theory where the sum of the coefficients in each 
row of A is used. This concept carries over in a 
natural way to the inconsistent case. But we must 
look at a different way to capture dominance by 
considering further possibilities not simply from 
the matrix itself or some arbitrary power of it, but 
from all its powers. 
The matrix A captures only the dominance of 
one alternative over every other in one step. But 
an alternative can dominate a second by first 
dominating a third alternative and then the third 
dominates the second. Thus, the first alternative 
dominates the second in two steps. It is known 
that the result for dominance in two steps is 
obtained by squaring the pairwise comparison ma- 


PAGE 11
T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 19 
trix. Similarly, dominance can occur in three steps, 
four steps and so on, the value of each is obtained 
by raising the matrix to the corresponding power. 
The rank order of an alternative is the sum of the 
relative values for dominance in its row, in one 
step, two steps and so on averaged over the num- 
ber of steps. The question is whether this average 
tends to a meaningful limit. It is easy to see that it 
does when A is consistent because A k = n k- 1A. 
We can think of the alternatives as the nodes of 
a directed graph. With every directed arc from 
node i to node j (which need not be distinct), is 
associated a nonnegative number aij of the domi- 
nance matrix. In graph-theoretic terms this is the 
intensity of the arc. Define a k-walk to be a 
sequence of k arcs such that the terminating node 
of each arc except the last is the source node of 
the arc which succeeds it. The intensity of a k-walk 
is the product of the intensities of the arcs in the 
walk. With these ideas, we can interpret the matrix 
Ak: the (i, j )  entry of A k is the sum of the 
intensities of all k-walks from node i to node j. 
Definition. The dominance of an alternative along 
all walks of length k ~< m is given by 
1 m A% 
m ~-" e'rA% " (3) 
k = l  
Observe that the entries of A% are the row sums 
of A k and that eVA% is the sum of all the entries 
of A. 
T h e o r e m  3. The dominance of each alternative along 
all walks k, is given by the solution of the eigenvalue 
problem A w = X max W. 
Pro o f.  Let 
Ake 
s k eTA% (4) 
and 
1 m 
tm = m E sk. (5) 
k = l  
The convergence of the components of tm to the 
same limit as the components of s,, is the stand- 
ard Cesaro summability. Since 
Ake ' w as k---, m, (6) s k -  eTAk e 
where w is the normalized principal right eigen- 
vector of A, we have 
1 ~ A% 
tm = -~ eVAk------ ~ -~ w as m ~ ~ .  (7) 
k = l  
The solution of the eigenvalue problem is ob- 
tained by raising the matrix A to a sufficiently 
large power then summing over the rows and 
normalizing to obtain the priority vector w = 
(w 1 ..... wn) ~. The process is stopped when the 
difference between components of the priority 
vector obtained at the k-th power and at the 
(k + 1)st power is less than some predetermined 
small value. 
In reference [7] we gave at least five different 
ways of deriving the priorities from the matrix of 
paired comparisons. Besides the eigenvector solu- 
tion, these include the direct row sum average, the 
normalized column average, and methods which 
minimize the sum of the errors of the differences 
between the judgments and their derived values 
such as the methods of least squares and logarith- 
mic least squares. We pointed out that the loga- 
rithmic least squares solution coincides with the 
principal right eigenvector solution for matrices of 
order n = 3, which is the first value of n for which 
inconsistency is possible and left and right eigen- 
vectors are reciprocals of each other which is not 
always the case for larger values of n. Since the 
appearance of the Analytic Hierarchy Process in 
the literature, other methods have been proposed 
[7,15]. All methods yield the same answer when 
the matrix is consistent. The combined use of a 
measure of inconsistency which can be derived in 
terms of both left and right eigenvectors, along 
with the right eigenvector solution which captures 
the dominance expressed in the judgments, is an 
effective way to look at the problem. We argue 
that so long as inconsistency is tolerated, domi- 
nance is the basic theoretical concept for deriving 
a scale and no other method qualifies. In addition, 
a counterexample has been provided in which the 
method not only does not generate a good ap- 
proximation, but also reverses rank. Some have 
even resorted to artificial axiomatization thinking 
that it gives a method the appearance of rigor, 
although axioms are assumptions not proofs. It 
may be that the arithmetic of a method is simpler 
than that used to obtain the eigenvector, but that 
no longer matters, because of the widespread use 


PAGE 12
20 T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 
of the computer. It is reasonable to argue that a 
theory for making sound decisions must stand on 
clearly justifiable grounds. 
The software package Expert Choice, useful in 
teaching and in real applications, can handle both 
relative and absolute measurement, as well as hav- 
ing special capabilities such as structural rescaling, 
combining group judgments, sensitivity analysis 
and dependence among the decision alternatives 
[2]. The reader interested in pursuing the subject 
further should consult references [3,7,8,13,15]. 
6. Normalization - Scarcity and abundance 
Normalization in the AHP is not just a mecha- 
nical operation. It contains information on the 
total dominance of the alternatives being com- 
pared which enables us to apportion the priority 
of the criterion to each alternative according to 
the relative dominance of the alternative. 
Normalization can also be associated with the 
idea of scarcity and abundance of the presence of 
a criterion in the alternatives such as redness in 
fruit. Too many fruits that are red make red 
abundant and unimportant in differentiating be- 
tween individual fruits. Conversely, if redness oc- 
curs intensely in some fruits but not in others, it is 
thus scarce and can be used as a criterion to 
differentiate in making a decision among fruits. 
Thus, the greater the contrast among the alterna- 
tives, the more useful is the priority value of the 
criterion allotted to each. Conversely, when for 
example, the contrast of the alternatives is smal- 
lest (when the total dominance is equal to n 2, see 
below) and hence all the alternatives are alike, the 
portion of the criterion priority assigned to each is 
equal. Thus a criterion with respect to which there 
is greater contrast and dominance among the al- 
ternatives is 'scarce' and consequently more in- 
fluential in determining rank than another crite- 
rion on which there is no distinction among the 
alternatives, i.e., their matrix of paired compari- 
sons has more l's in it. In being scarce, more of 
the criterion is allotted to the more dominant 
alternative and hence it affects the final ranking of 
that alternative more. 
An 'abundant' criterion contributes less to rank 
determination because it contributes an equal or 
nearly equal priority to each alternative and when 
the sum is taken over the criteria it has little effect 
in determining rank (recall that if a > b then 
a + c > b + c and c does not reverse order). An 
alternative that is a copy of another can dilute the 
priority of a decisive criterion so that it is no 
longer the controlling one in determining the final 
rank. We have: 
Theorem 4. ~ i j a i j  = n 2, if and only if all alterna- 
tives have equal dominance, i.e., aij = 1, i, j = 
1 . . . .  , n, with respect to a criterion. 
It is easy to see that n 2 is the minimum value 
of possible total dominance by a paired compari- 
son of n alternatives. The maximum value is, 
using 9 as the upper range of the scale of paired 
comparisons, [½n(n - 1)](9 + ~) + n = ~(41n 2 - 
32n). 
Our discussion of absolute and relative meas- 
urement may be framed in economic terms. In 
absolute measurement, value and need are identi- 
cal; 'the more value, the better the need is satis- 
fied'. In relative measurement, value is assessed in 
terms of need. Here surplus value may or may not 
satisfy more need. In fact, there are instances 
where satiation takes place and abundance can 
lead to a decline in the satisfaction of need. 
7. Clustering 
Comparisons of elements in pairs requires that 
they be homogeneous or close with respect to the 
common attribute; otherwise significant errors 
may be introduced into the process of measure- 
ment. In addition, the number of elements being 
compared must be small (not more than 9) to 
improve consistency and the corresponding accu- 
racy of measurement. For example, we may clus- 
ter apples in one way according to size, in another 
way according to color and in still another way 
according to age. The question then is how to 
perform clustering of homogeneous elements in an 
efficient way to facilitate paired comparisons. 
Clustering is a process of grouping elements with 
respect to a common property. One can then 
decompose the set of ordered elements with re- 
spect to an attribute into clusters of, for example, 
seven elements each, from largest to smallest. The 
smallest element of the largest cluster is included 
as one of the seven elements of the next cluster. 
The relative weights of all the elements in this 


PAGE 13
T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 21 
second cluster are divided by the weight of the 
common element and then multiplied by its weight 
in the first cluster in this manner both clusters 
become commensurate and are pooled together. 
The process is then repeated to the remaining 
clusters. Sometimes one may need to introduce 
hypothetical elements in order to preserve the 
gradual descent from large to small. 
We discuss three ways as to how to perform 
clustering on the alternatives of a decision prob- 
lem whose number may be very large and needs a 
different sorting for each of several attributes. 
They are ordered in the following discussion from 
the least to the most efficient way. 
7.1. The elementary approach 
order on that attribute. They can then be clustered 
into small groups as described above and pairwise 
compared. 
One reason why absolute measurement may not 
be desirable is that it is strongly subjective. In 
paired comparisons, measurement is based on ob- 
servation of the relative intensity of a property 
between two elements. Absolute measurement is 
based on observations stored in memory which 
depend on experience and on the ability to recall 
it. For many problems, it is useful to first carry 
out absolute measurement to sort and cluster the 
elements, and then follow that with relative meas- 
urement for greater accuracy. This is particularly 
relevant in predicting most likely outcomes which 
involve synergy among the alternatives. 
Given n elements in a level of the hierarchy, 
one may first make a pass through them by com- 
paring one element with another, dropping it and 
picking another if that one is perceived to be 
larger and continuing the comparison. Thus, the 
largest element is selected in n - 1 such compari- 
sons. The process is repeated for the remaining 
n -  1 elements to identify the second largest ele- 
ment and so on. In the end, the elements would be 
arranged in descending order of size or intensity 
according to an attribute and are sequentially 
clustered into groupings of a few elements each 
from the largest to the smallest. This process is 
highly inefficient and requires the astronomical 
number of (n - 1)! comparisons. 
7.2. Trial and error clustering 
The alternatives may be put into groups of 
large, medium and small. Then the elements in 
each group are put into several clusters of a few 
elements each, and a first pass at comparisons is 
used to identify misfits which are then taken out 
and put into the appropriate one of the other two 
categories. Reclustering is then performed and 
comparisons are carried out. If elements are found 
not to fit, they are again moved to the appropriate 
category. This process is repeated for each attri- 
bute. 
7.3. Clustering by absolute measurement 
Each alternative is evaluated by absolute meas- 
urement for an attribute, and thus in descending 
8. Combining relative and absolute measurement - 
Cost-benefit analysis 
An easy pitfall for an individual who has just 
learned about the A H P  is to take two or more 
criteria on which alternatives are measured on the 
same existing standard scale, such as dollars or 
kilograms, normalize each set and then compose 
with respect to the criteria. One quickly discovers 
that the answer is not the same as that obtained 
through the usual arithmetic and hastily concludes 
that the A H P  is at fault. To avoid this problem, 
one must exercise caution in converting measure- 
ments on a standard scale to relative values when 
several such criteria are involved [9]. 
For the arithmetic to conform with what one 
ordinarily does, assign each criterion a priority 
that is the sum of the measurements of the alter- 
natives with respect to it, divided by the sum of 
the measurements of all the alternatives under all 
the criteria measured with that unit. To find the 
composite priority for each alternative multiply 
the criterion weight by its corresponding normal- 
ized weight under that criterion and sum over the 
criteria. The result may be considered as the weight 
of the alternative with respect to one super crite- 
rion composed of all the criteria with the unit of 
measurement. That super criterion may then be 
compared with other intangible criteria and other 
super criteria with different units of measurement. 
Alternatively, one can perform priority compari- 
sons on all the data available without ascribing 
linearity to them as one ordinarily does with num- 


PAGE 14
22 T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 
bers. That is to say, one interprets what the num- 
bers mean and uses judgment rather than cranking 
the number mechanically. With rare exception, the 
judgement approach is by far the more effective 
procedure using the AHP to deal with the underly- 
ing complexity of a decision problem, and one 
need not be afraid to do it. It is known that scales 
are invented to facilitate communication, and must 
be experienced for a long time before they can be 
associated with our value system, during which 
time they almost always are modified. 
The AHP is a descriptive theory. Therefore, it 
is not an automatic set-up for accommodating any 
normative approach such as utility maximization. 
It needs to be interpreted and adapted for that 
purpose. It is even more difficult when a norma- 
tive theory has many exceptions so the AHP inter- 
pretation would not be universal. In utility maxi- 
mization it is assumed that it is always the case 
that the more utility or more money the better, 
but there are many instances when this is not true. 
For example, a government agency that is left 
with more money at the end of the year, gets a 
smaller allocation in a future budget. A rich indi- 
vidual in a poor country under revolt by the poor 
is likely to get killed. The availability of money is 
often an incentive to use money where other alter- 
natives could be more effective. Thus, AHP adap- 
tation for utility calculation purposes needs to 
take such caveats into consideration. One idea to 
keep in mind with the AHP is that the montonic- 
ity of utilities need not be preserved and may be 
contradicted. 
The foregoing has bearing on benefit-cost 
analyses. Expected utilities are used for repeated 
decision making. In that case, benefit cost analysis 
from two hierarchies is applied, and from it one 
can also calculate marginal benefit to cost ratios. 
Resource allocation may be made by using benefit 
to cost ratios thus derived. Short range decisions 
often include low costs as benefits in a single 
hierarchy. This is a useful approach when a deci- 
sion to spend money on one of several options has 
already been made. It is one way to combine 
benefits and costs as one does with dollars by 
taking differences. In the AHP one does not use 
differences. In such one-time decisions, costs may 
be regarded as inverse benefits so that benefits, 
low costs and other inconveniences are used to 
establish priorities for the alternatives. 
If, on the other hand, benefits and costs are 
measured in dollars along with intangible factors, 
they must first be composed according to the 
dollars and then combined with the intangible 
criteria as described earlier. Marginal benefit cost 
analysis along traditional lines can be carried out 
by arranging the costs in increasing order, and 
then forming ratios of successive differences of 
benefits and costs in that order. The very first 
ratio is that of the alternative with the smallest 
cost. Then one forms the ratio of differences with 
that between the next highest cost and the smallest 
one in the denominator, and the corresponding 
difference in benefits in the numerator. Whenever 
a difference in a numerator is negative, that suc- 
ceeding alternative is dropped from consideration. 
In this manner, the alternative yielding the highest 
marginal ratio is chosen. 
The next question is how to find a reasonable 
way to combine benefits (B) and cost (C), when a 
ratio rather than a single hierarchy are used [10]. 
This is useful in considering conflict problems 
involving more than one value system. Since the 
hierarchy of costs leads to a vector of values 
indicating relative maximum costs, the reciprocals 
of the entries of this vector could be thought of as 
the minimum costs incurred in jointly maximizing 
benefits and minimizing costs. In general, the out- 
comes from a hierarchy of benefits and a hierarchy 
of costs are two ratio scales whose corresponding 
ratios lead to a meaningful ratio scale. Their dif- 
ferences would not be meaningful. 
To maximize B / C  is equivalent to maximizing 
log B / C ,  which if B and C are close, may be 
approximated by ( B / C ) -  1 or ( B -  C ) / C  
known as return on investment, ROI. If B and C 
are not comparable, it would be initially clear that 
only the benefits or only the costs determine 
whether the allocation should be made or not. 
Some people have attempted to compare the 
foregoing with what is traditionally done in a 
single criterion choice problem. An example where 
B -  C alone gives rise to misleading results is 
given by my colleague L.G. Vargas: You have $1 
million to invest to get $1.101 million or you have 
$500000 to invest to get $600000. Which is a 
better investment? 
B - C analysis gives: 1.101 - 1 = 0.101, 
0.6 - 0.5 = 0.1, 
and the first alternative would be chosen. ROI 


PAGE 15
T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 23 
analysis yields 10.1% and 20%, respectively, and 
the second alternative which minimizes risk would 
be correctly chosen. 
9. The semiotic connection 
The Analytic Hierarchy Process is a tool of 
information communication and signification. In a 
general sense, it belongs to the study of language 
or semiotics. Semiotics or semiology is a coding in 
which one considers signals related by a set of 
rules or syntax; a set of states or contents called a 
semantic system, a set of possible behavioral re- 
sponses independent of the content system, and a 
rule associating signals with contents or with be- 
havioral responses. The idea of a code covers all 
four phenomena mentioned above. Eco [1] uses 
s-code for the first three and code for the fourth. 
According to Morris [5], the creator of semi- 
otics, semiosis is the process in which something 
functions as a sign. He mentions that both man 
and animals do respond to certain things as signs 
of something else, but their complexity in man is 
found in speech, art, writing, and even medical 
diagnoses. Science and signs are inseparably inter- 
connected. Semiotics, a step in the unification of 
science, supplies the foundations for any science 
of signs; linguistics, logic, mathematics, rhetoric 
and aesthetics. 
In the Analytic Hierarchy Process, words are 
used for concepts involved in decisions. In a sense, 
the purpose of all information is to decide on 
something--even if it is an imaginary hypothesis. 
The hierarchy is the syntax, the subject of a deci- 
sion is the semantic, prioritization is the rule asso- 
ciating signals with content, and behavior com- 
prises the possible decision alternatives. This way 
of looking at the AHP needs to be highlighted and 
emphasized to drive home the universality of the 
decision process. 
10. Catastrophe and the AHP 
One of the most burning quests we undertake 
using the knowledge we acquire is explaining and 
forecasting, and in particular, forecasting catas- 
trophes, or, mathematically speaking, sudden dis- 
continuities that affect the order of the alterna- 
tives. This is a situation that is at odds with the 
earlier mathematical principle of small perturba- 
tions we gave in which small changes in input lead 
to small changes in outcomes. In catastrophes, 
there is a part of the problem in which small 
changes in conditions at some critical value can 
give rise to very large changes in outcome. All we 
can do is either to anticipate and take strong 
preventive action or prepare ourselves in advance 
with contingency plans together with emotional 
acceptance for how to deal with the emergency to 
pay a smaller penalty if it occurs, or be prepared 
to pay the full penalty having accepted that it 
could happen. Because catastrophes are usually 
unseen surprises, it gives us a feeling of control to 
think we can account for catastrophes in our daily 
lives. According to the dictionary, a catastrophe is 
a sudden disaster or happening that causes great 
harm or damage; a calamity. Even the idea of 
what constitutes a catastrophe is relative. Some- 
one whose life is tormented by an opponent may 
regard it as a blessing if a catastrophe befalls the 
tormentor. In other terms, a catastrophe may be 
regarded as a very strong discontinuity in think- 
ing. How do we represent a catastrophe in terms 
of the AHP? 
In a catastrophe the element of surprise arises 
from a shift in ranking of the outcomes. Thus, if a 
situation is ongoing a certain choice of alternatives 
may be indicated, but a slight change in the situa- 
tion may cause a sudden shift to another choice 
that would have been previously very undesirable. 
How can we allow for catastrophic occurrences in 
the AHP? 
One way to allow for a catastrophe is to always 
include a criterion for the unknown that repre- 
sents a cluster of unforseen threats. It may itself 
have subcriteria. The alternatives are carefully 
prioritized with respect to this criterion for the 
unexpected and its descendants. The criterion it- 
self is assigned a low priority. Now we can imag- 
ine that at each instant the judgments in the 
criteria are flashed in their totality on a screen 
followed by the best choice of alternatives. With 
some changes in judgments, in general, choice is 
stable and the changes in relative priority of the 
alternative slight. After a certain lapse of time, 
there is a sudden change in judgment in the direc- 
tion of this criterion making it more important. 
The corresponding choice of alternatives is also 
suddenly changed surfacing a very undesirable 
alternative. Thus, one might include among the 


PAGE 16
24 T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 
GOAL _ _  
- ~  OLDWRECK 
( 0 . 0 0 2 )  
CHEVY 
(0.009) 
- -  SIZE >--> HONDA 
(0.0Sl) (0.013) 
--> TOYOTA 
(0.026) 
i 
---~ OLDWRECK 
(0.005) 
CHEVY 
_ OPERCOST > (0.019) 
(0.135) -> HONDA 
(0.044) 
"> TOYOTA 
(0.067) 
__> NORMAL 
(0.99O) 
- -  STYLE 
(0.269) 
_ LOWPRICE 
(0.535) 
- -  SIZE 
(o.oos) 
_ OPERCOST 
(0.001) 
L~ ACCIDENT . ~  
(oolo) - - - 3  
- -  STYLE 
(0.0o2) 
LOWPRICE 
(0.001) 
I 
I 
OLDWRECK 
I 
--'~ (0.010) 
CHEVY 
(0.086) 
--~ HONDA 
(0.086) 
TOYOTA 
(0.0~) 
OLDWRECK 
I (0.026) 
CHEVY 
(0.081) 
HONDA 
(0.201) 
TOYOTA 
(0.227) 
OLDWRECK 
(0.004) 
CHEVY 
(0.001) 
HONDA 
(0.000) 
TOYOTA 
(0.001) 
OLDWRECK 
(o.001) 
CHEVY 
(0.00o) 
HONDA 
(0.00o) 
TOYOTA 
(0.00o) 
--~ OLDWRECK 
I (o.001) 
--> CHEVY 
(0.000) 
> --> HONDA 
(o.000 
---> TOYOTA 
(0.00o) 
OLDWRECK 
I (0.o00) 
--> CHEVY 
(0.o00) 
-~ HONDA 
(0.001) 
--~ TOYOTA 
(o.ool) 
PRIORITIES 
TOYOTA 
~.142) 
HONDA 
(0.115) 
CHEVY 
(0.166) 
OLDWRECK 
~.576) 
P R I O R I T I E S  
TOYOTA 
(0.408) 
HONDA 
(0.345) 
CHEVY 
(0.197) 
OLDWRECK 
(0.049) 
Figure 2. T h e  c a t a s t r o p h e  h i e r a r c h y  


PAGE 17
T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 25 
alternatives some catastrophic ones. This type of 
thinking would apply in hierarchies where a real 
wrong choice is extremely undesirable and costly. 
We can also speak of chaos in the AHP: a 
situation where the possibility of exerting control 
by creating a hierarchy and setting judgment no 
longer exists, for it is not clear what takes prece- 
dence over what. Usually catastrophe produces 
chaos. It is possible to represent both catastrophe 
and chaos in the continuous setting of the AHP. 
Both catastrophe and chaos are relative. A rev- 
olution may be regarded as an undesirable 
catastrophe that uproots a society or as a neces- 
sary kind of action to produce a desired end. In 
planning, strong out-of-the-ordinary action may 
be crucial for affecting change. 
A simple illustration of how to represent a 
catastrophe is given in Figure 2. An individual 
buying a car makes an innocent choice by assum- 
ing that normal conditions will prevail over acci- 
dents in the ratio of 0.99 to 0.01. He chooses a 
nice new Toyota, although he knows that there is 
a chance that an accident can happen. If he were 
to buy the car under the assumption of a high 
likelihood of an accident, 0.99 to 0.01, and if he 
were to act in his best self interest, he would 
choose an old wreck to buy. One answer to this 
dilemma is neither to buy the old wreck nor the 
Toyota, but to buy a fairly good used car. But 
most of us are idealists who do not think that 
accidents will happen to us, and so we buy new 
cars. 
11. What affects rank [lll 
Although in catastrophes there is a sudden shift 
in rank, due to a change in the importance of the 
criteria, what happens to the rank of the alterna- 
tives in the more mundane event that their num- 
ber is changed by adding new ones or deleting old 
ones? The traditional rule is that rank reversal is 
not acceptable if, given that the alternatives them- 
selves are independent of each other, a new alter- 
native does not introduce a new criterion or change 
the weights of the existing criteria. We tend to 
treat rank in a possessive manner by sometimes 
insisting that it stay the same no matter what logic 
says. The absolute mode of measurement of the 
A H P  complies with this normative inclination, but 
the relative mode of measurement does not, be- 
cause of the dependence of the measurements of 
the alternatives on each other. However, relative 
measurement will preserve rank with respect to a 
single criterion when the comparisons are con- 
sistent. Most people understand the dependence 
of alternatives in light of the notions of scarcity 
and abundance discussed earlier. There is no need 
to improvise notions of relevant and irrelevant 
alternatives, as is done in utility theory, because 
with relative measurement everything being com- 
pared is by definition relevant, Utility theory is 
obsessed with the reversal of rank because in that 
theory it can happen even with respect to a single 
criterion. This is a phenomenon that is strongly 
counterintuitive and can never be made mathe- 
matically right. Utility theorists, however, try to 
make it right by philosophical arguments about 
what is or is not a relevant alternative. 
12. Summary of principles 
The A H P  generates relative ratio scales of 
measurement. The measurements of a set of ob- 
jects on a standard scale can be converted to 
relative scale measurements through normaliza- 
tion. Only in a very localized way can a relative 
set of measurements have a unit, obtained by 
dividing the entire set by the smallest measure- 
ment. The normalization and composition of 
weights of alternative with respect to more than a 
single criterion measured on the same standard 
scale leads to nonsensical numbers, because nor- 
malizing separate sets of numbers destroys the 
linear relation among them. The weights must first 
be composed with respect to all such criteria and 
then normalized for AHP use. We can interpret 
such composition as we did in Section 8 as a 
special kind of weighting of the particular criteria. 
Thus, the AHP, with its relative measurement 
offers no guide on the outcome of manipulations 
based on combining different measurements from 
a standard scale such as a criterion of benefits and 
a criterion of costs, both measured in dollars, and 
used to select a best alternative. 
If we do not insist that the linearity of a scale 
needs to be preserved (an old habit from when we 
did not have an effective way to interpret the 
information content of readings from a standard 
scale), we can then treat every criterion as an 
intangible. In that case we must bear in mind that 


PAGE 18
26 T.L. Saaty / The AHP: How to make a decision 
the weights of the criteria do not derive from some 
underlying standard scale. If they must depend on 
such a scale, we are back to the need to compose 
before normalization. 
The moral is that we are sometimes led into 
developing blind expectations for that to which we 
are accustomed out of habit, and not necessarily 
because its truth is something written in granite. 
We believe that our own tempered understanding 
should produce closer results to experience than 
simply following tradition, which has possibly 
rutted our thinking, and induced us to forego 
change in search of better ways that give better 
answers. 
References 
[1] Eco, U., A Theory of Semiotics, First Midland Book 
Edition, Indiana University Press, IN, 1976. 
[2] Forman, E., and Saaty, T., Expert Choice Software 
Package for IBM PC, Expert Choice, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA 
1983-1990. 
[3] Harker, P.T. (ed.), "Special Issue on The Analytic 
Hierarchy Process", Socio-Economic Planning Sciences 
20/6 (1986). 
[4] Miller, G.A., "The magical number seven, plus or minus 
two: some limits on our capacity for processing informa- 
tion", The Psychological Review 63 (1956) 81-97. 
[5] Morris, C.W., Foundation of the Theory of Signs, Interna- 
tional Encyclopedia of Unified Science, Vols. I and II: 
Foundations of the Unity of Science, Vol. 1, No. 2, 
University of Chicago Press, 1938. 
[6] Saaty, T.L., Decision Making for Leaders: The Analytic 
Hierarchy Process for Decisions in a Complex World, RWS 
Publications, Pittsburgh, PA, 1986; Original version pub- 
lished by Lifetime Learning Publications, 1982. 
[7] Saaty, T.L., Multicriteria Decision Making: The Analytic 
Hierarchy Process, 1988; Revised and published by the 
author; Original version published by McGraw-Hill, New 
York, 1980. 
[8] Saaty, T.L., "Scaling method for priorities in hierarchical 
structures", Journal of Mathematical Psychology 15/3 
(1977) 234-281. 
[9] Saaty, T.L., "A note on the AHP and expected value 
theory", Socio-Economic Planning Sciences 20/6 (1986) 
397-398. 
[10] Saaty, T.L., and Kearns, K.P., Analytical Planning: The 
Organization of Systems, International Series in Modern 
Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Vol. 7, Per- 
gamon Press, New York, 1985. 
[11] Saaty, T.L., and Vargas, L.G., "Inconsistency and rank 
preservation", Journal of Mathematical Psychology 28/2 
(1984). 
[12] Vargas, L.G., "Reciprocal matrices with random coeffi- 
cients", Mathematical Modelling 3 (1982) 69-81. 
[13] Vargas, L.G. (ed.), "Special Issue on The Analytic 
Hierarchy Process", Mathematical Modelling 9/3-5 
(1987). 
[14] Wilkinson, J.H., The Algebraic Eigenvalue Problem, 
Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1965. 
[15] Zahedi, F., "The analytic hierarchy process - A survey of 
the method and its applications", Interfaces 16/4 (1986). 
